CHAPTER 7


Learning Engineering
is Ethical
by Jordan Richard Schoenherr *



An act has no ethical quality whatever unless it be chosen out
        of several all equally possible. – William James


What is Ethical in Learning Engineering?
Education and training are replete with questions of values and ethics.1 For example,
questions arise during instructional design and delivery about who should teach a
course, what material will be covered, how that material will be presented, and how
a learner’s knowledge will be assessed. The answer to each of these will have value
implications within, and outside of, the learning context. Additionally, a number
of ethical issues define the learning context, including accessibility, copyright and
intellectual property rights, learner privacy, and diversity.2
       The value-laden nature of instructional design and learning engineering
mustn’t be overlooked.3 In parallel, there has been growing recognition that the
values of learners need to be incorporated into the process of design.4 In other
words, not only are the products of learning engineering value-laden, so too are
its processes. Design decisions and other learning engineering activities should be
informed by frameworks that consider values and ethics—from the perspective of
learners, educators, and communities.
       This chapter considers how to address ethical learning engineering in a
principled, systematic manner. It offers an ethical sense-making approach and a
practical framework for ethical sense-making in learning engineering.


* The author would like to thank Jodi Lis for her insightful feedback throughout the writing
  process for this chapter.


DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-11
202 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




                                             !!"
     Ethics in the Learning Engineering Process
     Using the learning engineering process described in Chapter 1, ethical considerations
     can be identified at each stage.
            The challenge stage involves understanding the ethical affordances (or ethical
     features) of the problem space. This includes understanding the learner population,
     the technologies available to instructional designers and learning engineers, and the
     sociocultural context where learning will occur. At this stage, value-based design
     frameworks can be used to identify the general questions that should be asked during
     the design process and the appropriate means to assess the ethical affordances of a
     design. As well, learners themselves should be engaged to understand what values
     are important to them and how these values might be considered in framing the
     challenge.
            In an iterative creation stage, learning engineers and instructional designers
     will begin to identify vulnerabilities in the design that result from bringing together
     early models and mock-ups, piloting assessment instruments and educational
     interventions. At this stage, a preliminary assessment of performance can help us
     determine whether specific design characteristics or features discriminate against
     some populations of learners. This assessment focuses on discrimination with
     respect to successful participation in designed activities, successful learning, and
     engagement and motivation responses with the learning activities and content (for
     example, level of challenge, connections to interest). Learning engineers must then
     consider how, or whether, to address these issues and be prepared to justify their
     decisions.
            Adoption introduces other social and ethical concerns. Implementation may
     be carried out in unintended ways, leading to unintended unethical consequences.
     As well, during the implementation phase, the learning engineering team must
     consider information ethics, especially issues concerning privacy, consent, and user
     autonomy. These considerations must be incorporated into implementation design.
     This requires an understanding of a community, their relationships, and values. For
     instance, the requirements of privacy are not only determined by legislation but also
     by sociocultural traditions.
            The investigation stage provides an opportunity to investigate possible im-
     provements to the current solution and to potentially correct weaknesses in areas of
                                                 Learning Engineering is Ethical | 203



value sensitivity. This is also a phase in which data are analyzed. Careful consid-
eration should be given to avoid bias in interpretation of those data, in protecting
learner privacy, and in interpreting the data through a lens of ethical sense-making.
       Outside of the process model outlined in Chapter 1, we must also consider
a parallel set of concerns for the technology ecosystem. As learning engineering
technologies (for example, learning management systems, adaptive instructional
systems) and approaches (for example, human-centered design, anti-discrimination
design) become widely adopted, there will be competition and cooperation by
individuals and organizations. Here, ethical questions will also play a key role. We
must consider how technologies can be standardized as well as their transparency,
their accessibility, and their interoperability. As technologies evolve, we must ensure
that learners can access and understand their data and the methods used to create
them by developing standards that reflect the best practices of learning engineering
communities.


                                        !""
Ethics: From Principles to Practice
In both Eastern (for example, Confucius) and Western (for example, Aristotle)
philosophical traditions, the discipline of ethics has been considered a competency.
Virtues reflect qualities or traits that must be cultivated over time. Like any
competency, ethical sense-making requires knowledge to identify the features
of a situation that are ethically relevant. These features, or ethical affordances,
don’t necessarily exist objectively within the world. Rather, much like technical
affordances, ethical affordances require an understanding of how an individual
interacts with their environment. Even if a learning engineer considers the ethical
affordances associated with the intended function of a product, unintended uses
might introduce new ethical issues.


ETHICAL PRINCIPLES, NORMS, AND CONVENTIONS

Given their roles and responsibilities, prescriptive norms apply to learning engi-
neers. Typically, these norms are defined in laws, codes of conduct, or guidelines.
These norms can be defined for a specific knowledge domain, such as health pro-
fessions education, or for a kind of product developed by learning engineers, such
as adaptive instructional systems (AIS) or autonomous systems, more generally.5
204 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     As the multiplicity of principles suggests, although learning engineers might simply
     believe that the design process ends once a product, instrument, or process has been
     completed, they must also consider how their innovations are adopted by specific
     communities.


     PROFESSIONAL CODES OF CONDUCT

     Education, training, and engineering professions have available codes that consider
     social and ethical issues associated with instruction.

     Education. Professional associations at all levels of education have adopted codes
     of ethics. For instance, the Association for Educational Communications and Tech-
     nology’s (AECT) Code of Professional Ethics presents a set of values that express
     a commitment toward learners, society, and their profession.6 In terms of learners,
     ethical practice requires promoting independence in the pursuit of learners’ goals,
     participation in educational programs, and protecting the rights (especially privacy),
     health, and safety of learners. In addition to these positive norms, the AECT code
     also emphasizes nonmaleficence in terms prohibiting actions related to stalking,
     bullying, harassment, defamation, and retaliation. Emphasis is also placed on the
     consideration of varying points of view, which suggests a recognition of the need
     to avoid personal biases. On a broader scale, the AECT also notes that instructional
     designers and educators need to differentiate between individual and organization-
     al views, accurate representation and communication of educational issues to the
     public, and promotion of diversity. Similar principles have also been articulated by
     the National Education Association 7 and the International Society for Performance
     Improvement.8

     Training and Talent Development. Paralleling approaches in academia, the
     learning and development (L&D) industry has also recognized the need to develop
     its own principles. For instance, the Association for Talent Development has devel-
     oped a code of conduct that describes expected behaviors and practice that should
     occur in the context of professional training and development. Like other codes, it
     considers the personal, professional, and social obligations of talent developers. The
     order of the eleven values described in the code indicates priority, with “the rights
     and dignities” of the individual followed by the development of “human potential.”
     The code also addresses issues related to privacy, copyright law, confidentiality, and
     professional integrity. The Talent Management Institute provides a more compre-
     hensive list of twenty-eight values that prioritize “knowledge and compliance of the
                                                 Learning Engineering is Ethical | 205



law,” conduct with stakeholders, and upholding professional integrity followed by
broad ethical issues, such as avoiding biases and prejudice, reporting misconduct,
and assigning credit.9 However, many of these values appear to overlap (for example,
loyalty, prudence, care for clients, fair dealing with clients, and no misrepresen-
tation). Many other codes of conduct and guidelines are also available that reflect
extensions of organizational and business ethics.10

Engineering. Engineering fields also have professional codes that relate to general
and specific affordances. For instance, the IEEE has identified nine ethical principles,
including the safety and health of the public, avoidance of conflicts of interest, as
well as treating individuals fairly while avoiding harassment. Given the breadth of
the society’s membership, technical affordances are only considered at a very general
level. For instance, the fifth principle states that members should “seek, accept, and
offer honest criticism of technical work, to acknowledge and correct errors, to be
honest and realistic in stating claims or estimates based on available data, and to
credit properly the contributions of others.” Despite its generality, this principle and
others place a high value on technical competencies.
       In addition to its code of ethics, the IEEE has recently identified general
principles to ensure ethically aligned design.11 These principles are directed
toward developing trustworthy autonomous and intelligent systems that support
human values. They include human rights, well-being, data agency, effectiveness,
transparency, accountability, awareness of misuse, and competence of designers.
For instance, data agency requires that individuals have control over their identity
and can securely share their data. Transparency requires that the processes used
when processing data are discoverable; whereas awareness of misuse requires that
preventative steps be taken to minimize risk and misuse of data.
       Another notable set of principles has been developed by the Association for
Computing Machinery (ACM). The ACM has identified three broad sets of ethical
principles pertaining to general, professional, and leadership responsibilities.
Both the structure and the content of the ACM code are notable. For instance,
by specifying three levels of responsibility (as an individual, group member, and
leader), the code addresses the specific demands of different roles. The ACM also
adds several principles. For example, the principle of nonmaleficence (avoid harm)
and beneficence (help) are fairly standard, but they also recognize that ethical issues
can arise when modifying, retiring, and replacing systems.

Psychology. In that learning engineering is fundamentally about cognitive and
social psychological processes, learning engineers should also consider principles
206 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     developed in psychology. To address ethical concerns, the American Psychological
     Association (APA) has developed norms to encompass activities such as research,
     practice, and teaching. The APA has identified five equal principles that should
     “guide and inspire” the activities of psychologists.12 As Figure 7.1 demonstrates, each
     of these has applicability to learning engineering. For instance, learning engineers
     shouldn’t only consider design features in terms of the learning environment,
     learning algorithms, and the provision of feedback; they should also consider how
     these learning systems are implemented and the associated ethical implications.
     This is something we will return to below. Similar sets of norms have been adopted
     by other organizations (for example, the National Commission for Health Education
     Credentialing, 2020).13


     NATIONAL AND REGIONAL STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES

     In addition to organizational and professional codes of conduct, learning engineers
     must also be aware of national and international standards. Although a complete
     review of these is outside the scope of this chapter, a few notable frameworks are
     considered.

     Ethical AI. At a general level, UNESCO has developed recommendations for the
     ethics of artificial intelligence noting that “living in digitalizing societies requires new
     educational practices, the need for ethical reflection, critical thinking, responsible
     design practices, and new skills, given the implications for the labor market and
     employability.” 14 They identify four core values:

           1. Respecting, protecting, and promoting human dignity, human rights, and
              fundamental freedoms
           2. Recognizing and promoting environment and ecosystem flourishing
           3. Ensuring diversity and inclusiveness
           4. Living in harmony and peace

     These values inform ten principles of systems design, including human oversight
     and determination, transparency and explainability, awareness and literacy, and
     multi-stakeholder and adaptive governance and collaboration.

     Ethical use of personal information. Perhaps the most noteworthy standards for
     legal and ethical use of data are provided in the General Data Protection Regulation
     (GDPR), a regulation in European Union law on data protection and privacy in the
     EU and the European Economic Area. While it’s law in the EU, it’s also being used
                                                       Learning Engineering is Ethical | 207




   PRINCIPLE          APA DESCRIPTION              LEARNING ENGINEERING EXAMPLES
Beneficence         “Psychologists strive to    Learning engineers should develop learning
and                 benefit those with whom     and assessment methods and products
Nonmaleficence      they work and take          that help learners and organizations. They
                    care to do no harm.”        shouldn’t develop methods that are associated
                                                with the dissemination of disinformation
                                                or misinformation or misrepresent the
                                                state of knowledge in a domain.
                                                Learner data should be used only for the
                                                intended purpose, and learners must be aware
                                                of this purpose, providing valid consent.
Fidelity and        “Psychologists              Learning engineers should ensure that they
Responsibility      establish relationships     have the trust of their employers and their
                    of trust with those with    users. They should understand the obligations
                    whom they work.”            that they have to these parties and declare
                                                conflicts whenever possible. They should seek
                                                to minimize real, apparent, or potential conflicts
                                                of interests and respect intellectual property.
Integrity           “Psychologists seek         Learning engineers must engage in a process of
                    to promote accuracy,        knowledge translation to facilitate stakeholder
                    honesty, and truthfulness   understanding of learning engineering.
                    in the science,
                    teaching, and practice
                    of psychology.”
Justice             “Psychologists recognize    Learning engineers should develop products,
                    that fairness and justice   processes, and services that are equally
                    entitle all persons to      accessible to all, that recognize di!erences
                    access to and benefit       in social norms and culture, and that steward
                    from the contributions of   diversity of approaches and perspectives.
                    psychology and to equal     Learning engineers should avoid working with any
                    quality in the processes,   individual or organization associated with fraud,
                    procedures, and services    corruption, or human rights violations, for example,
                    being conducted by          working with organizations that use slave labor.
                    psychologists.”
                                                Learning engineers should respect
                                                democratic institutions that promote
                                                procedural fairness and social justice.
Respect for         “Psychologists respect      Learning engineering must promote the autonomy
People’s Rights     the dignity and worth       of the learner. Learners must understand the
and Dignity         of all people, and the      assessment context, be provided with tools that
                    rights of individuals to    allow them to challenge it, and foster well-being.
                    privacy, confidentiality,   Learning engineering must ensure that learner
                    and self-determination.”    data remain confidential, anonymous, and be
                                                protected. Learners should be informed of how
                                                their data are used, provided with applicable
                                                retention standards, and options for data erasure.

FIGURE 7.1. Excerpts from the APA principles and their applicability to learning engineers
208 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     as a guideline for ethical treatment of personal data in other countries. In the United
     States, the state of California adopted the California Consumer Privacy Act that has
     similar provisions to GDPR.
            A significant issue raised in this framework is the so-called “right to be forgot-
     ten.” The guideline states that “[a] data subject should have the right to have personal
     data concerning him or her rectified and a ‘right to be forgotten’ . . . ” 15 Similar
     requirements have been echoed in learning engineering, in terms of standards for
     integrated / comprehensive learner records.
            Governmental and nongovernmental organizations have also suggested ethi-
     cal design principles. For instance, the United Kingdom developed Government De-
     sign Principles that include considering users’ needs, using available data to inform
     design, consistency (rather than uniformity), ensuring broad accessibility of design,
     and understanding the context of use.16 Similar approaches have been adopted else-
     where too. For instance, the community-driven Principles for Digital Development
     defines broadly applicable tenets including closing knowledge gaps in communities
     and presenting data in an easily accessible format as well as diverse, responsible,
     and rigorous data collection and use practices.17 Finally, perhaps the most innovative
     example is the Guiding Principles of the Internet of Education. The group who de-
     veloped the principles frames their approach as an “ongoing conversation across a
     global community of practice.” 18 The ten principles are:

           1. One open internet of education
           2. Distributed governance
           3. Effective collaboration
           4. Open standards
           5. Open participation
           6. Proportional influence
           7. Diversity, equity, and inclusion
           8. Data dignity
           9. Agency and access control
           10. Life-long learning

     These principles create a framework that aligns with many learning engineering eth-
     ical ideals, such as open standards and participation, proportional influence (number
     and diversity of learners), the promotion of life-long learning, and decentralized
     control to support sharing between stakeholders.
                                                Learning Engineering is Ethical | 209




                                       !#"
Ethical Sense-Making for Learning Engineering
An ethical sense-making approach to learning engineering can be defined by princi-
ples that incorporate actionable strategies.

  ► Design requires ethical sense-making. Designing ethical systems and
      conditions for learning requires we acknowledge that the environments we
      work in are often ambiguous. Even when we’re familiar with their features,
      we must question our assumptions. As designers, we must consider both the
      affordances that liberate users and the anti-affordances that constrain their
      actions. We must also consider whether specific groups of learners will
      experience more rewards or costs than others. Ethical sense-making should
      be promoted through design, empowering users to think clearly and critically.
  ► Design affects communities. Engineering designs are human artifacts.
      They’re both tools and symbols. Learning engineering teams must consid-
      er the impact of their designs on communities. Community engagement is
      essential. Understanding how a community sees itself, how they see others,
      and the community’s needs, as well as their deep sociocultural and linguistic
      traditions, takes time, respect, humility, and deference.
  ► Learning engineering affects individuals. Designs affect individual users,
      who are each a unique combination of traits, strategies, and personal histories.
      Designs must promote learners’ understanding of the systems and processes
      they’re using. Designers must ensure that users can critically challenge both
      technical and ethical affordances of a design by promoting autonomy.
  ► Learning engineers are community leaders. Depending on the needs of a
      community, the role of a learning engineering team will vary. Regardless,
      designers must acknowledge that they are responsible for their design—its
      use, disuse, and misuse. They must be accountable to their stakeholders.
  ► Learning engineers will experience conflicts of commitments. Participants
      in the learning engineering process are embedded in multiple communities.
      As professionals, we have commitments to our professions. As employees, we
      have commitments to our organizations. As educators, we have commitments
      to our students. As persons, we have commitments to our community. Conflicts
      of interest are inevitable. They must be declared and mitigated. Team members
      must be conflict competent.
210 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



         ► Learning engineers are advocates. Wherever possible, designs and algo-
              rithms within a learning engineering solution should be transparent. Both the
              affordances and anti-affordances of a design should be made clear to users.
              Transparency always will be relative to the competency of the individual and
              the community. Designers must be advocates and leaders for social and ethical
              issues. They must engage in knowledge translation between communities.



      FRAMEWORK FOR APPLYING ETHICAL SENSE-MAKING
      IN THE LEARNING ENGINEERING PROCESS

      An approach for ethical sense-making in learning engineering is shown in Figure
      7.2. First, the APA’s principles are adopted as a starting point because they address
      the kinds of situations learning engineers will encounter in most experimental and
      applied settings. Next, these principles are applied to the stages of the learning
      engineering process. The corresponding matrix requires that teams consider how
      each ethical principle is presented at each stage by asking a series of corresponding
      questions. (See Chapter 17 for the detailed application of this approach.)


         Principle            Challenge       Creation      Implementation    Investigation

    Beneficence and
    Nonmaleficence

    Fidelity and
    Responsibility

    Integrity


    Justice


    Respect for
    People

   FIGURE 7.2. Sense-making Ethical Evaluation Matrix (SEEM) for Learning Engineering
   CC-BY Jordan Richard Schoenherr
                                                 Learning Engineering is Ethical | 211




                                        !$"
Ethical Examples from Health Care Education
When people think about the health care professions, white lab coats, stethoscopes,
prostrate patients, and a caricature of the Hippocratic Oath (do no harm)19 likely
come to mind. Beyond these stereotypes, the health care professions are defined by
specific professional competencies and guided by numerous legal and professional
standards. For instance, the Canadian Medical Association Code of Ethics defines
a set of virtues (compassion, honesty, humility, integrity, and prudence) that should
inform decision-making inclusive of patients’ values and experiences. Health care
professions are expected to use this code to inform every area of practice, including
medical education.
       Health care and health care education often involve uniquely challenging sit-
uations that illustrate boundary conditions 20 for ethical sense-making (see Figure
7.3). For example, medical training sometimes requires the use of donated human
remains.21 Here, values and ethics range from codes of conduct (see the left side of
Figure 7.4) to more symbolic gestures of respect. For instance, the University of Ot-
tawa has erected monuments to donors (refer to the right side of Figure 7.4), holds an
annual commemorative service for families of donors,22 and publicly acknowledges
these contributions with medals of recognition. Although symbolic, “loved ones,
who sometimes feel their altruistic gifts go unnoticed, cherish this concrete form of
appreciation.” 23
       Educators in the health care professions might be aware of ethical issues in
ways that may not be immediately clear to other teachers and trainers. Even so, they
can still miss some ethical considerations. On occasion, I sometimes collaborate
with health educators. Two case studies from that experience illustrate examples
of ethical blind spots in education related to learner participation in studies and the
recognition of the contributions of others.


LEARNER PARTICIPATION IN STUDIES

In health professions education, activities are often first designed as a means to de-
velop a competency (a hypothetical set of knowledge and skills) in learners. Educa-
tors might decide to conduct educational studies as a secondary objective. However,
I’ve found that they didn’t always perceive the ethical affordances of the situation
ETHICAL BOUNDARY CONDITIONS
The term boundary condition is used in the social sciences as well as in the physical
sciences, mathematics, and engineering. Boundary conditions specify situations in which
relations between variables change depending on the values of other variables. Boundary
condition in ethics reflects the extremes of object or entity. Defining boundaries in the case
of categories of objects (rather than physical entities) can be extremely problematic. For
instance, when determining a boundary, we might attempt to differentiate between ethical
and unethical behavior by identifying a set of criteria, such as what causes more good than
harm or what contains more features associated with good or bad behavior.

In practice, “good” and “bad” behaviors overlap such that in one set of circumstances an
action might be correct, while in another, the same behaviors might be incorrect—like stealing
to support one’s family versus stealing to advance one’s position. In practice, this creates a
region of uncertainty that can result in ambiguity and misclassification, as shown in Figure
7.1. Depending on the individual and circumstances, this region can be larger or smaller.


                                        REGION OF
                                       UNCERTAINTY




             UNETHICAL                                              ETHICAL

   FIGURE 7.3.A. Simplified general model of ethical decision-making



In mathematics and engineering,
                                            UNETHICAL ACTIONS
the boundary conditions are a set                                                          BOUNDARIES
of conditions that must be satisfied
to solve a boundary value problem.
A solution to a boundary value                         ETHICAL ACTIONS
problem is a solution that also
satisfies the boundary conditions.
Figure 7.2 illustrates a boundary                                UNETHICAL ACTIONS
value problem.


                     FIGURE 7.3.B. Illustration of a boundary value problem for ethical actions
                                                       Learning Engineering is Ethical | 213



in the same way that I did. For instance, in a few cases, I had to ask colleagues to
request an ethics review for their educational studies.
       For these educators, if education research didn’t include patients, research
ethics approval often consisted of a short review and a waiver. My concerns also
stemmed from my background. In contrast to many of my medical colleagues, I
focused on obtaining informed consent and recognizing that the learner might feel
pressured to participate in a study or simply fail to withdraw from a study because
they were already enrolled in the course.
       Thus, while informed consent was a principle that both my colleagues and I
shared, I found that those educators didn’t understand its application in this context.
Much like the notion of behavioral traces, they viewed learners’ data as byproducts of
the educational activity. Consequently, they considered the ethical implications with
a different disciplinary lens. In addressing these concerns, my colleagues became
aware of the ethical implications. Thus, whether working in a multidisciplinary team
or with diverse groups of stakeholders, identifying issues related to values and ethics
can be quite revealing.




            Code of Conduct
     in the Anatomy Laboratory
  …2. Fulfill the expectations of the donors and
  honor their wishes by studying the bodies with
  purpose and respect. Treat the donated bodies
  and prosections as you would wish your own body,
  or that of a member of your family, to be treated.
  3. All donated bodies and prosections should be
  handled with respect. Neither the donated bodies
  nor any parts thereof are to be positioned or
  displayed in inappropriate, comical or obscene
  manners.
  …6. NO unauthorized photographs from mobile
  devices or digital camera are ever to be taken…




FIGURE 7.4. Excerpts from McGill anatomy laboratory code of conduct (left).
Monument commemorating individuals who donated their remains (right). Inscription:
“In memory of those who have generously given their body for the advancement of
science and medical education.”
Credit: Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa
214 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     RECOGNIZING THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF OTHERS

     Ethics in instructional design and learning engineering requires recognizing
     the contributions of all stakeholders. In medical simulation centers, many tasks
     use existing training systems. (See Figure 7.5, left.) Training sessions that use
     these materials tend to focus on the development of team decision-making and
     communication skills. Instructional designers in health professions education often
     assumed that the use of these technologies was sufficient to promote the acquisition
     of complex skills. However, many novel training tasks were created to address more
     foundational skills. In many cases, elegant training solutions were developed by
     technicians that worked at the simulation center at the request of clinicians. Many
     of these training tasks were exceptionally novel, using a variety of materials and
     techniques, for example, multi-layer synthetic tissue models with shampoo packets
     to model abscesses. (See Figure 7.5, right.) In many cases, technicians described the
     design and developmental process in a manner that suggested their autonomy, with
     little to no input from the clinicians. However, other than interpersonal expressions
     of thanks, technicians were often not formally acknowledged as contributors in
     instructional design in publications or presentations.
             During a formal presentation about the ethics of contribution in research,
     I observed these value conflicts directly. I used the lack of acknowledgment as a
     talking point to illustrate how junior team members, students, and technicians are




     FIGURE 7.5. Research assistant demonstrating the simulation environment with a
     mannequin located in a full-scale model of an emergency room (left). Sample of a used
     synthetic tissue abscess model (right). The model consists of synthetic skin (rubber),
     foam, shampoo packets, and duct tape and staples to secure the layers. Learners
     probe the sample to find the location of the abscess, make an incision, palpate, and
     clean the synthetic wound.
     Credit: Jordan Richard Schoenherr
                                               Learning Engineering is Ethical | 215



often overlooked. A clinician sitting in the audience quickly put up their hand and
confidently asked in a rhetorical manner “Why would we put their [technicians’]
name on a paper? We pay them.” In the case of this clinician, thanks and remuneration
were appropriate forms of recognition for the contributions of technicians whereas
authorship was reserved for others. Following the discussion, I was tentatively
approached by other clinicians. They thanked me for raising and discussing concerns
about the need to recognize team members even though it was a taboo topic. Similar
concerns can also arise in student-educator projects wherein differing expectations
can lead to inappropriate recognition.24


                                       !%"
Ethical Sense-Making
The existence of a plurality of ethical frameworks, guidelines, and codes high-
lights the fact that ethics requires more than mere compliance with a set, or sets,
of principles. Learning engineers must interpret these principles, resolve conflicts
between different (often incommensurable) values, identify ethically relevant fea-
tures of a situation, and consider how relational structures can impact learning and
decision-making. They must engage in an ethical sense-making process and be con-
scious of the ethical dimensions of instructional design.25
       There’s a great temptation to address ethical concerns after we’ve designed
a course or instructional technology. Research suggests that we often rationalize
our ethical intuitions.26 Ethical sense-making requires considering moral reasoning
abilities, the effects of stress and divided attention of moral judgments, and
situational factors that determine what values are made accessible by features of the
environment.27 A few general features of ethical sense-making should be considered
when engaging in learning engineering in that they affect the judgments of learners,
instructional designers, and academic administrators:
   ► Moral development is thought to progress through three broad stages:
      children are driven by punishment and reward, teens and young adults
      by adherence to social conventions or those of society, whereas adults can
      use ethical principles. Ethical principles can reflect a focus on utility, de-
      ontological principles, or care. These are the kinds of principles embodied
      in professional standards and guidelines. However, not everyone successfully
      progresses through these stages.28
216 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



        ► Failures of attention and time limitations can lead us to neglect values
           and ethics.29 For instance, researchers suggest that when individuals are com-
           pleting a task and don’t believe their performance is being monitored, they’re
           more likely to attempt to deceive evaluators. However, reminders of codes of
           conduct immediately before a task can increase academic integrity.30 Sharing
           is also promoted when individuals believe they’re being monitored 31 whereas
           the experience of anonymity can increase in antisocial behaviors.32
        ► Similar norms and conventions are evidenced across cultures. Cross-
           cultural values fall into two distinct clusters based on individual-focused (care
           and fairness / proportionality) and group-focused moral motivations (authority,
           loyalty, and sanctity / purity).33 Contextual factors and group influence can
           determine which norms are relevant at any given time.34 However, individuals
           often tend to devalue members of other groups when considering ethical
           responses.
        ► Psychological studies have also demonstrated that even if we apply certain
           norms to our group, we do not necessarily apply them to others. Learners
           and educators use social categories and identities to understand the learning
           environment.35 The mere mention of sex or race before a task can lower a
           learner’s performance. This is further supported by studies of academic
           impostor syndrome that demonstrate some learners don’t feel they deserve
           their achievements.36
        ► Engaging in effortful reasoning doesn’t guarantee moral behavior. Rea-
           soning can be associated with less ethical behavior.37 These findings suggest
           that individuals often rationalize choices based on their affective responses.
        ► Empathy is an important factor in determining moral judgments.38 Fac-
           tors that promote empathy tend to increase helping behavior. In contrast, when
           individuals are directed toward thinking about abstract values (for example,
           monetary incentives), they tend to request and give less assistance. For in-
           stance, research suggests that framing a task as a business game 39 reduces
           collaboration relative to when a task is framed as a community game.40
            Learning engineering teams must take these factors into consideration. Fac-
     tors that decrease ethical behavior, such as anonymity, divided attention, ambigu-
     ous ethical standards, and rationalization, can present challenges for both learners
     and learning engineers. In that many of these biases might be implicit for learners
     and educators, they require specific consideration during the design process.41 By
                                                 Learning Engineering is Ethical | 217



adopting an ethical sense-making approach to design, we can take these factors into
consideration.


                                        !&"
Ethical Examples from Everyday Education
I was once approached by a student who wanted to discuss concerns they had about
the lecture content. In the lecture, I presented a brief (anonymized) story of an
acquaintance of mine who struggled with a particular mental health issue to illustrate
the diversity and complexity of human behavior and the ubiquity of such concerns.
When they spoke to me, the student stated that they felt the discussion misrepresented
the mental health issue, making reference to inappropriate, normative standards.
Moreover, they felt that the discussion of psychological disorders was inappropriate
in academia because it might cause students psychological distress. These kinds of
discussions are growing in number as the roles of learners and educators are being
negotiated. They illustrate the need to understand the value of ethical sense-making
in the daily business of academia.
       At the core of ethical sense-making is the need to understand context. Simply
identifying a conflict in values isn’t sufficient for resolving the issue. In this case,
further discussion provided considerable insight into the source of the student’s
concerns. First, the student indicated that they had personal, ongoing experience
dealing with mental health issues. They acknowledged that these particular issues
were emotionally charged. Second, they had in fact misattributed something stated
in the textbook to my lectures, a general psychological phenomenon referred to as
failure of source monitoring. After I listened to and acknowledged the student’s
perspective, the student thanked me for hearing what they had to say, noting that
not all lecturers had done so in their experience. The student acknowledged their
reaction and that they understood my intent. I also reinforced that students should
feel comfortable raising their concerns, additionally noting that these topics were
within the scope of the course and should be addressed in academia.
       In this case, the simple act of gathering more information to understand some-
one else’s perspective, to empathize with the student, promoted interpersonal respect
and allowed for the discussion of sensitive issues. By listening, educators not only
support dialogue, but they can also gain an understanding of how learners approach
the material and adapt their courses. This incident also illustrates that educators
can’t be complacent in terms of how material is presented to students. They must
218 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     address aspects of the textbook or other learning resources and clearly distinguish
     between personal and academic perspectives of both learners and educators. Beyond
     these issues, instructors also must ensure that they take into consideration poten-
     tial differences in cultural norms for interactions between students and instructors.
     What might be perceived as disrespectful behavior (for example, question course
     content, curt emails) might not be perceived as such by the student.


                                             !'"
     Ethics in Assessment and Design
     Learning engineering requires a framework that addresses both the underlying
     technical and value-laden dimensions of design. This framework must be applicable
     to traditional approaches to pedagogy and assessment as well as more advanced
     learning technologies that reflect adaptive or intelligent learning systems.


     ETHICAL ASSESSMENTS

     Samuel Messick developed a general value framework for use in assessment.42 (See
     Figure 7.6.) He acknowledged that the development of training and assessment in-
     struments has always been informed by values. In contrast to earlier frameworks,
     Messick assumed that construct validity was the principal means to evaluate the
     utility of instructional design and assessment. The foundation of assessment reflects
     an instrument’s construct validity in terms of the amount and kind of evidence as
     well as whether it reflects a representative sample of the information and processes
     associated with the competency of interest.
            Concurrently, we must also consider whether an assessment instrument is
     suited for its purpose. For instance, a five hundred–item assessment might have con-
     siderable construct validity supporting its use but might not feasibly be implemented
     within an organizational context due to the time required for its completion. Messick
     also stressed the need to understand the broad value implications of an assessment
     instrument. For instance, high or low scores could result in promotion or termination
     within an organization or in a student passing or failing a course. These reflect value
     judgments about whether an employee or student is good or bad. Finally, Messick
     suggests that we go further to consider the social consequences of our assessment.
     For instance, a test can be used to classify and label someone with a learning disabil-
     ity that could result in changes in their social status.
                                                     Learning Engineering is Ethical | 219




                                 Test Interpretation              Test Use

        Evidential            Construct Validity         Construct Validity +
        Basis                                            Relevance / Utility

        Consequential         Construct Validity +       Construct Validity +
        Basis                 Value Implications         Relevance / Utility +
                                                         Value Implications +
                                                         Social Consequences

       FIGURE 7.6. Facets of Construct Validity
       Adapted from Messick (1995)



VALUE-BASED DESIGN

Complementing value-based approaches to psychometrics are valued-based
approaches to design. Here, we consider four broad approaches that attempt to
integrate user-centered design frameworks: value sensitive design, reflective design,
design justice, and anti-discrimination design.

Value Sensitive Design. Friedman and colleagues define value sensitive design
as “a theoretically grounded approach to the design of technology that accounts for
human values in a principled and comprehensive manner throughout the design pro-
cess.” 43 Values must be included throughout the iteration of the design process (out-
lined in Chapter 1), which incorporates conceptual, empirical, and technical aspects
of the process. According to value sensitive design, the three kinds of investigations
can be defined as:
      • Conceptual: Specifying the fundamental values that are relevant to
        design, thereby providing a common point of comparison for all members
        of a design team
      • Empirical: Using qualitative and quantitative methods adopted from
        the social sciences to examine how technology works within the
        implementation context
      • Technical: Examining the extent to which specific technologies support
        or interfere with the realization of human values (retroactive analysis) or
        design technologies to support values that have been identified within the
        conceptual design phase
220 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



            The value sensitive design approach incorporates many elements of ethical
     sense-making in that it considers the ethical affordances of a system. These aspects
     of design have become increasingly important given that the exploitation of users’
     patterns of behavior has become increasingly apparent.44 Although the practical
     outcomes of adopting a value sensitive design approach might align with ethical
     sense-making, designers should make more deliberate attempts to identify how so-
     cial and cognitive processes are impacted by specific design decisions.

     Reflective Design. An alternative approach, referred to as reflective design,
     stresses “analysis of the ways in which technologies reflect and perpetuate uncon-
     scious cultural assumptions, with design, building, and evaluation of new computing
     devices that reflect alternative possibilities.” 45 This approach consists of six princi-
     ples and design strategies shown in Figure 7.7.


                       PRINCIPLES                                    STRATEGIES
      Reflection is required to critically identify   Ensure that users can take responsibility for
      what values are embedded within a               and control the meaning-making process
      design, what values are comparatively           when engaged with socio-technical systems
      neglected, and what methods can be
      used to address marginalized values
      Reflection should be used by designers          Engage users in the design process
      to understand their assumptions and             to develop a digital sca!olding that
      role within the design process                  facilitates their comprehension of new
                                                      concepts and new system features
      Designers should facilitate                     Use feedback collected from or about
      users’ understanding of their                   users as input into the system or to
      relationship with technologies                  help guide the evaluation of a system
      Skepticism should be promoted, enabling         Users’ feedback should be collected
      users to critically consider how technology     and used through the design
      a!ects their choices and behavior               process, rather than at the end
      Acknowledge that reflection and                 Systems should be used in an
      action are not mutually exclusive               analogous manner to experiments
      Mutual engagement of designers and              Consider a variety of metaphors
      users in the development and use of             adopted from di!erent disciplines
      technologies can facilitate reflection          to understand the design space

     FIGURE 7.7. Principles and strategies for reflective design
     Adapted from Sengers et al. (2005)



           In its critical approach to design, the reflective design process embodies a num-
     ber of features of ethical sense-making. Rather than adopting a designer-centered
                                                Learning Engineering is Ethical | 221



approach wherein a designer “[stands] aloof, benignly passing down opportunities
for reflection,” reflective design suggests that technologies should be designed to
engage designers and their users in a continuous process of meaning-making. Thus,
the basic features of ethical sense-making can be used in the process of reflective
design to direct designers to vulnerabilities they face in engaging users in effortful
reflection on their relationships with technology.

Design Justice. Perhaps the most critical approaches to design are the design
justice principles (also discussed in Chapter 3). Described as a living document, the
principles are directed toward reformulating and restructuring the design process,
including the role of the designer and other stakeholders.46 Designers are referred
to as facilitators rather than experts and assume that the lived experience of all
stakeholders makes them experts. A central feature of the theory that informs de-
sign justice is that design can reinforce existing biases. For instance, when learners
are forced to choose a response on a multiple-choice question, a design necessarily
limits the correct response, failing to consider why learners selected an alternative
response. In many cases, learners might simply be wrong. However, the response
alternatives selected by an instructional designer might reflect cultural biases.
Within clinical psychology, the pathologizing of homosexuality in early versions of
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual presents such an example.47 If learners are
presented this information in a course and a corresponding question on a test, they
would be required to respond in a manner that runs counter to their beliefs.
      Instead, much like reflective design, design justice assumes that the goal
of design should be to empower, sustain, and heal communities. Consequently,
communities should be seen as the leaders and controllers of a collaborative design
process that attempts to use existing approaches that are well-adapted to the commu-
nity and to offer new, nonexploitative design solutions. These principles represent an
important framework. However, like all frameworks that have a number of values,
conflicts can arise.

Anti-discrimination Design. The final framework that we will consider here is
referred to as anti-discrimination design. Like design justice, it takes as its focus
discriminatory practices that might be embedded within the design. It additionally
provides a useful typology of three classes of design features:

   ► Non-Affordances and Poor Affordances: Non-affordances reflect a failure
      to include affordances that are apparent to the user. Rather than reflecting a
      design failure, they reflect an absence of specific features. In contrast, poor
222 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



           affordances are perceived by the user but lack a clear identification of what the
           features do, for example, bad design.
        ► Discriminatory Non-Affordances and Poor Affordances: Non-affordances
           and poor affordances that result in a disadvantage (or advantage) given to
           a specific set of users. These issues arise when examining design from the
           users’ perspective. For instance, if auditory cues are used as an affordance, the
           design will disadvantage individuals with hearing impairment.
        ► Disaffordances and Dysaffordances: These issues arise when examining
           design from the users’ perspective. Disaffordances fail to recognize relevant
           user identity groups. Dysaffordances additionally require unaccommodated
           users to misrepresent themselves. For example, learners using an online
           learning application might be forced to select a specific disability, gender, or
           racial category due to an absence of other options.48

           Crucially, the anti-discrimination design framework also emphasizes the
     importance of stewardship associated with the role of designer or engineer. For
     instance, D. E. Wittkower notes that:

           . . . even if a developer team somehow were absolutely diverse,
           absolutely self-aware, and absolutely politicized, such a strategy for
           anti-discriminatory design wrongly implies that the socially privileged
           designer has neither ability nor responsibility to engage in anti-
           discriminatory design. In other words, a developer working on her own
           should not excuse herself from the responsibility to attempt to think
           through diverse user experiences.49

     VALUE-BASED DESIGN AND ETHICAL SENSE-MAKING

     At their core, value sensitive design, reflective design, design justice, and anti-dis-
     crimination design share features with an ethical sense-making approach. Namely,
     designers must consider the mental models of the members of the communities
     learning engineering will impact. Rather than limiting themselves to the techni-
     cal features that they, and users, perceive within a system, they must consider the
     ethically relevant features of a system. This requires understanding what learners
     and their community perceive as a value. Designers often will find themselves in
     ethically ambiguous or ambivalent situations. For instance, designers will potential-
     ly be faced with value conflicts, for example, communities might not wish to accept
     certain members, they might wish to promote values that are at odds with those of
                                              Learning Engineering is Ethical | 223



the designer, or human rights. Most troubling, designers might be faced with the
decision of compromising on certain values to assist with a community. By adopting
an approach based on ethical sense-making, instructional designers and learning
engineers can reflect on how they have included values within design as well as how
their design choices can create affordance and anti-affordance.




           Although learning engineers might
              simply believe that the design
              process ends once a product,
            instrument, or process has been
          completed, they must also consider
           how their innovations are adopted
                 by specific communities.
    • Ethical decision-making occurs at every learning engineering stage.

    • Learning engineers must consider values and ethics while selecting the
      content, pedagogical approaches, assessment strategies, and content
      delivery methods as well as throughout the learning engineering process,
      such as during design or experimentation. Many situations might seem
      ethically ambiguous or neutral in the absence of reflection.

    • Learning engineers must consider how the learning context can impact
      learning performance and perception. They must consider learner
      community values as well as the physical and social environments of the
      implementation context.

    • Professionals who engage in learning engineering are guided by
      professional codes of conduct as well as national and international
      guidelines that contain high-level ethical principles.

    • Learners and educators are continuously engaged in ethical sense-
      making, which is sensitive to factors including stress, divided attention,
      the social environment, and task framing. These can increase or
      decrease pro-social behavior and adherence to social norms.

    • Boundary conditions are used to specify situations in which relations
      between variables change depending on the values of other variables.
      Ethical boundary conditions establish gray areas where the same action
      may be ethical or unethical depending on contextual variables.

    • Ethical a!ordances are contextually relevant design features that comply
      with established ethical principles and respect the values of stakeholder
      communities. Anti-a!ordances are contextually relevant design features
      that fail to comply with established ethical principles or fail to respect the
      values of stakeholder communities.

    • Including values and ethics in design requires an understanding of
      the ethical a!ordances of a system. This requires operationalizing how
      learners interact with a system. Stakeholders should be engaged through
      all stages of development, implementation, and technology di!usion to
      ensure their concerns have been taken into account.



LEARNING ENGINEERING IS ETHICAL

KEY POINTS
                                                          Learning Engineering is Ethical | 225



Endnotes
1   Here, values is used to refer to non-ethical values (for example, preferences, social norms and
    conventions) whereas ethics is used to refer to individual morality and values defined in formal
    ethical systems.
2   Moore, Stephanie L. and James B. Ellsworth. “Ethics of Educational Technology.” In Handbook
    of Research on Educational Communications and Technology, 113–127. New York: Springer,
    2014. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-3185-5_10
3   Mabry, Christie Knittel and Tony O’Driscoll. “Lessons from Adult Education: Identifying and
    Exploring Emerging Ethical Issues in Technologically Enhanced Performance.” Performance
    Improvement Quarterly 16, no. 4, (2003): 78–93.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1937-8327.2003.tb00296.x
4   Bødker, Susanne. Through the Interface: A Human Activity Approach to User Interface Design.
    Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1990
5   Schoenherr, Jordan Richard. “Designing Ethical Agency for Adaptive Instructional Systems: The
    FATE of Learning and Assessment.” Adaptive Instructional Systems: Design and Evaluation,
    HCII 2021, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 12792, edited by Robert A. Sottilare and J.
    Schwarz, 265–283. Cham: Springer, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-77857-6_18
6   “AECT Code of Professional Ethics 2018.” Association for Educational Communications and
    Technology, 2018. www.aect.org/docs/AECT_Code_of_Ethic-Current.pdf
7   “Code of Ethics for Educators.” National Education Association, September 14, 2020.
    www.nea.org/resource-library/code-ethics-educators
8   “Code of Ethics.” International Society for Performance Improvement, 2002.
    https://ispi.org/general/custom.asp?page=CodeofEthics
9   “The Code of Ethics.” Talent Management Institute, 2021.
    www.tmi.org/about-talent-management-institute/tmi-code-of-ethics
10 Jones, Campbell, René Ten Bos, and Martin Parker. For Business Ethics, 1st ed. New York,
   London: Routledge, 2005. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203458457
11 “Ethically Aligned Design: A Vision for Prioritizing Human Well-being with Autonomous
   and Intelligent Systems—Version II Request for Input.” IEEE Global Initiative on Ethics of
   Autonomous and Intelligent Systems, 2018. https://standards.ieee.org/content/dam/ieee-
   standards/standards/web/documents/other/ead_v2.pdf
12 Schoenherr, Jordan. “Moral Economies and Codes of Conduct: The Social Organization of
   Canadian Experimental Psychology.” Scientia Canadensis: Canadian Journal of the History of
   Science, Technology and Medicine 41, no. 1 (2019): 31–54. https://doi.org/10.7202/1065958ar
13 “Code of Ethics for the Health Education Profession.” Coalition for National Health Education
   Organizations (CNHEO), 2020. http://cnheo.org/code-of-ethics.html
14 Ad Hoc Expert Group for the Preparation of a Draft Text of a Recommendation the Ethics of
   Artificial Intelligence. “Outcome Document: First Draft of the Recommendation on the Ethics of
   Artificial Intelligence.” Paris: United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization
   (UNESCO), 2020. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000373434
15 Council of the European Union. Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the
   Council on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on
   the Free Movement of Such Data (General Data Protection Regulation). Brussels: Council of the
   European Union, 2015. See especially page 68. https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/
   ST-9565-2015-INIT/en/pdf
226 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     16 Central Digital and Data Office. “Guidance: Government Design Principles.” United Kingdom
        Government. Last modified September 10, 2019.
        www.gov.uk/guidance/government-design-principles
     17 “Principles for Digital Development.” Accessed December 29, 2021. https://digitalprinciples.org
     18 “The IoE Guiding Principles.” Internet of Education. Accessed December 29, 2021.
        www.internetofeducation.org/#Guiding-Principles
     19 Formally, this is referred to as the Principle of Nonmaleficence.
     20 Busse, Christian, Andrew P. Kach, and Stephan M. Wagner. “Boundary Conditions: What They
        Are, How to Explore Them, Why We Need Them, and When to Consider Them.” Organizational
        Research Methods 20, no. 4 (2017): 574–609. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428116641191
     21 Champney, Thomas H. “A Proposal for a Policy on the Ethical Care and Use of Cadavers and
        Their Tissues.” Anatomical Sciences Education 4, no. 1 (2011): 49–52.
        https://doi.org/10.1002/ase.199
        Jones, D. Gareth and Mike R. King. “Maintaining the Anonymity of Cadavers in Medical
        Education: Historic Relic or Educational and Ethical Necessity?” Anatomical Sciences Education
        10, no. 1 (2017): 87–97. https://doi.org/10.1002/ase.1618
     22 “Body Bequeathal Program.” Department of Innovation in Medical Education, University of
        Ottawa. Last modified December 22, 2021. https://med.uottawa.ca/department-innovation/
        division-clinical-and-functional-anatomy/body-bequeathal-program/memorial-service
     23 “Medal of Recognition.” The Ottawa Hospital. Last modified December 30, 2016. www.
        ottawahospital.on.ca/en/clinical-services/deptpgrmcs/programs/organ-and-tissue-donation-
        program/donor-awareness/medal-of-recognition
     24 Schoenherr, Jordan Richard. “Social-Cognitive Barriers to Ethical Authorship.” Frontiers in
        Psychology 6 (2015): 877. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00877
     25 Osguthorpe, Russell T., Richard D. Osguthorpe, W. James Jacob, and Randy Davies. “The Moral
        Dimensions of Instructional Design.” Educational Technology 43, no. 2 (2003): 19–23.
        www.jstor.org/stable/44428816
     26 Haidt, Jonathan, and Jesse Graham. “When Morality Opposes Justice: Conservatives Have Moral
        Intuitions that Liberals may not Recognize.” Social Justice Research 20 (2007): 98–116.
        https://doi.org/10.1007/s11211-007-0034-z
     27 Schoenherr, Jordan Richard. “Ethical Sensemaking and Autonomous and Intelligent Systems:
        Identifying the Ethical Affordances of A/IS.” Frontlines in AI Ethics, edited by Andrew Hampton
        and Jeanine DeFalco. London: Routledge, forthcoming.
     28 Kohlberg, Lawrence. Moral Development. McGraw-Hill, 1973.
     29 Darley, John M., and C. Daniel Batson. “‘From Jerusalem to Jericho’: A Study of Situational and
        Dispositional Variables in Helping Behavior.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 27,
        no. 1 (1973): 100–108. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0034449
     30 Mazar, Nina, On Amir, and Dan Ariely. “The Dishonesty of Honest People: A Theory of Self-
        Concept Maintenance.” Journal of Marketing Research 45, no. 6 (2008): 633–644.
        https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.45.6.633
     31 Shariff, Azim F. and Ara Norenzayan. “God is Watching You: Priming God Concepts Increases
        Prosocial Behavior in an Anonymous Economic Game.” Psychological Science 18, no. 9 (2007):
        803–809. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01983.x
                                                         Learning Engineering is Ethical | 227



32 Diener, Edward, Scott C. Fraser, Arthur L. Beaman, and Roger T. Kelem. “Effects of
   Deindividuation Variables on Stealing Among Halloween Trick-or-Treaters.” Journal of
   Personality and Social Psychology 33, no. 2 (1976): 178.
   https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.33.2.178
33 Haidt, Jonathan and Jesse Graham. “When Morality Opposes Justice: Conservatives Have Moral
   Intuitions that Liberals May Not Recognize.” Social Justice Research 20, no. 1 (2007): 98–116.
   https://doi.org/10.1007/s11211-007-0034-z
34 Lapsley, Daniel K. and Darcia Narvaez. “A Social–Cognitive Approach to the Moral Personality.”
   In Moral Development, Self, and Identity, edited by Daniel K. Lapsley and Darcia Narvaez,
   189–212. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, 2004.
35 Cikara, Mina, Rachel A. Farnsworth, Lasana T. Harris, and Susan T. Fiske. “On the Wrong Side of
   the Trolley Track: Neural Correlates of Relative Social Valuation.” Social Cognitive and Affective
   Neuroscience 5, no. 4 (2010): 404–413. https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsq011
36 Osborne, Jason W. “Testing Stereotype Threat: Does Anxiety Explain Race and Sex Differences in
   Achievement?” Contemporary Educational Psychology 26, no. 3 (2001): 291–310.
   https://doi.org/10.1006/ceps.2000.1052
   Spencer, Steven J., Claude M. Steele, and Diane M. Quinn. “Stereotype Threat and Women’s
   Math Performance.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 35, no. 1 (1999): 4–28.
   https://doi.org/10.1006/jesp.1998.1373
   Steele, Claude M. and Joshua Aronson. “Stereotype Threat and the Intellectual Test Performance
   of African Americans.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 69, no. 5 (1995): 797–811.
   https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.69.5.797
37 Mulder, Laetitia B. and Eric van Dijk. “Moral Rationalization Contributes More Strongly
   to Escalation of Unethical Behavior Among Low Moral Identifiers than Among High Moral
   Identifiers.” Frontiers in Psychology 10 (2020): 2912. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02912
   Fiske, Alan Page and Tage Shakti Rai. Virtuous Violence: Hurting and Killing to Create, Sustain,
   End, and Honor Social Relationships. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014.
38 Hoffman, Martin L. Empathy and Moral Development: Implications for Caring and Justice.
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
39 Vohs, Kathleen D. “Money Priming Can Change People’s Thoughts, Feelings, Motivations,
   and Behaviors: An Update on 10 Years of Experiments.” Journal of Experimental Psychology:
   General 144, no. 4 (2015): e86. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000091
40 Liberman, Varda, Steven M. Samuels, and Lee Ross. “The Name of the Game: Predictive Power
   of Reputations Versus Situational Labels in Determining Prisoner’s Dilemma Game Moves.”
   Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 30, no. 9 (2004): 1175–1185.
   https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167204264004
41 Wittkower, Dylan E. “Principles of Anti-Discriminatory Design.” In Proceedings of the 2016
   IEEE International Symposium on Ethics in Engineering, Science and Technology (ETHICS),
   Vancouver, May 13–14, 2016, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/ETHICS.2016.7560055
42 Messick, Samuel. “Validity of Psychological Assessment: Validation of Inferences from Persons’
   Responses and Performances as Scientific Inquiry into Score Meaning.” American Psychologist
   50, no. 9 (1995): 741–749. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.50.9.741
43 Friedman, Batya, Peter H. Kahn, Alan Borning, and Alina Huldtgren. “Value Sensitive Design and
   Information Systems.” In Early Engagement and New Technologies: Opening Up the Laboratory,
   edited by Neelke Doorn, Daan Schuurbiers, Ibo van de Poel, and Michael E. Gorman, 69–101.
   Dordrecht: Springer, 2013. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-7844-3_4
228 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     44 Bösch, Christoph, Benjamin Erb, Frank Kargl, Henning Kopp, and Stefan Pfattheicher. “Tales
        from the Dark Side: Privacy Dark Strategies and Privacy Dark Patterns.” Proceedings on Privacy
        Enhancing Technologies, no. 4 (2016): 237–254. https://doi.org/10.1515/popets-2016-0038
        Gray, Colin M., Yubo Kou, Bryan Battles, Joseph Hoggatt, and Austin L. Toombs. “The Dark
        (Patterns) Side of UX Design.” In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
        Computing Systems, 1–14. New York: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018.
        https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174108
     45 Sengers, Phoebe, Kirsten Boehner, Shay David, and Joseph Kaye. “Reflective Design.” In
        Proceedings of the 4th Decennial Conference on Critical Computing: Between Sense and
        Sensibility, 49–58. New York: Association for Computing Machinery, 2005.
        https://doi.org/10.1145/1094562.1094569
     46 Costanza-Chock, Sasha. “Design Justice: Towards an Intersectional Feminist Framework for
        Design Theory and Practice.” In Proceedings of the Design Research Society, Limerick, Ireland,
        June 25–28, 2018. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3189696
     47 Zucker, Kenneth J., and Robert L. Spitzer. “Was the Gender Identity Disorder of Childhood
        Diagnosis Introduced into DSM-III as a Backdoor Maneuver to Replace Homosexuality? A
        Historical Note.” Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy 31, no. 1 (2005): 31–42.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/00926230590475251
     48 Wittkower, DE. “Disaffordances and Dysaffordances in Code.” In Selected Papers of #AoIR2017:
        The 18th Annual Conference of the Association of Internet Researchers, Tartu, Estonia, October
        18–21, 2017. https://journals.uic.edu/ojs/index.php/spir/article/view/10174
     49 Wittkower, “Disaffordances and Dysaffordances in Code.”
                         TOOLS
                          SHORT PRACTICAL CHAPTERS
WITH EASY-REFERENCE CHECKLISTS, GUIDES, + TEMPLATES
CHAPTER 8


Tools for Understanding
the Challenge
by Erin Czerwinski and Jim Goodell



Learning engineering is a repeatable process that starts with a challenge.
This chapter introduces practical tools for understanding those learning
engineering challenges to be solved by a learning engineering team.


The challenges learning engineers address are focused on helping every targeted
learner be successful in reaching learning goals. This might include creating things
that help learners make progress toward a goal (for example, refer to the section in
Chapter 2 on addressing learners’ zones of proximal development and scaffolding)
or things that help targeted learners overcome barriers as illustrated in Figure 8.1.
       Learning engineering teams are often asked to examine learning conditions
to determine what factors could be adjusted to improve learning for one or more
targeted populations of learners. This chapter provides tools to help elaborate on




                                 ET
                             ASS                  BARRIER




 Understand           Understand the CHALLENGES in context             Understand
 the LEARNERS                 (barriers and assets)                      the GOAL


FIGURE 8.1. Learning engineering challenges can be thought of as barriers
that must be overcome—and assets to use to assist—on the way to a goal


DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-13
232 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     what needs to be learned, the conditions that might need to be addressed, and the
     complexities of that learning. The four tools include task analysis, the five whys
     technique, cause and effect analysis, and failure mode and effects analysis.
            Supporting learning so that every targeted learner can be successful requires
     knowing quite a bit about who the learners are; what they already know, are capable
     of, and have experienced; what resources they bring to their learning; what their
     interests and goals are and what will keep them engaged; the context in which the
     learning is to happen and the resources and constraints associated with those con-
     texts; the capabilities, practices, preferences, and content knowledge of those helping
     the learners to learn (such as teachers, family, and peers); what tends to be difficult
     about learning the new skills; and more. Consequentially, to fully understand the
     learning engineering challenge, consider using the kinds of tools discussed in this
     chapter in conjunction with tools from other chapters, including:

           •   Chapter 9, Tools from the Learning Sciences
           •   Chapter 12, Human-Centered Design Tools
           •   Chapter 15, Tools for Learner Motivation
           •   Chapter 16, Implementation Tools (to understand conditions and constraints)
           •   Chapter 18, Data Analysis Tools



      Analysis is the study we do in order to figure out what to do.
                        – Allison Rossett and Kendra Sheldon 1



     Task Analysis

     Task analysis is used when a targeted skill isn’t already precisely defined. This ap-
     proach is frequently used to unpack the component skills and knowledge needed to
     accomplish a task.


     Various task analysis methods attempt to unpack the declarative, procedural, and
     strategic knowledge a person must have to perform a task in a given context (defined
     by a set of conditions and available tools). Behavioral task analysis identifies the
     observable or directly measurable behaviors. Cognitive task analysis is used for
                                        Tools for Understanding the Challenge | 233



tasks that require high-level reasoning, such as decision-making, problem solving,
or judgments. Task analyses should also uncover necessary mindsets, attitudes, or
habits of mind / practice. Training expert Donald Clark identifies the following kinds
of information captured during a task analysis: 2
      •   Conditions: Tools or equipment needed and the task environment
      •   Performance Measure: How well must it be performed?
      •   Frequency: How often is the task performed, for example, hourly or daily?
      •   Difficulty: Use a standard scale, such as from one to five
      •   Importance: How important is this compared to performers’ other tasks?
      •   Steps: Knowledge and logical steps for performing the task
Uncovered information might also include:
      • Dependent Attitudes: What habits of practice or thinking are helpful?
      • Transferable Skills: What skills used in other contexts can be applied?
Task analyses should identify various methods a person might use to successfully
perform the task using different sets of tools in different contexts (in this way
predicting a set of learner differences and different ways a learner might carry out the
task). Learners come with deficiencies in what they know; they also come with funds
of knowledge—things they already know and are capable of. A single, rigid solution
path or a deficiency-based learning experience can be unmotivating for learners
who have other ways of knowing and / or doing. Performance task analysis includes
identifying the variety of ways the task can be carried out, the variety of ways each
part of the task can be carried out, and the different prior knowledge and skills
learners might engage to learn the task. The most effective learning experiences offer
learners opportunities to learn and demonstrate a skill using multiple approaches.
They are developed with an understanding of learners’ funds of knowledge as well
as what they haven’t yet attained.


HOW TO USE

The analysis process involves interviewing and / or observing a variety of people
who do the task competently and / or analyzing documentation of the tasks being
performed. In an academic context, the list of tasks may be defined by academic
standards. In a training context, the process of task analysis starts by analyzing the
job or role. Let’s say we already know the task, for example, training employees to
estimate the cost of a new carpet installation for an irregularly shaped room. We’ll
need to unpack the task into its steps. Then, for each step, we inquire about what a
234 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     person must:
             •   Know prior to doing the step
             •   Perceive during, for example, the set of rectangles making up the room
             •   Attend to during, for example, the customer, care with customer property
             •   Do during the step
     While interviewing or observing someone doing the task, ask them to tell you:
             •   What they’re thinking at each step
             •   What they’re observing
             •   When they make a decision, what assumptions they make
             •   How they know their decisions are right and the work product is correct
     A template like the one below can be useful. Also see Chapters 6 and 18 for information
     on learning curve analysis; effective task analyses should specify tasks in enough
     granularity to support future learning curve analyses. Learning engineering best
     practices call for competency definitions with data-justified specificity, meaning we
     want to be able to prove that the competency is at the atomic level with data.


     PERFORMANCE TASK ANALYSIS TOOL TEMPLATE
     Task:

        Task Step             Know           Perceive        Attend To           Do




     FIGURE 8.2. Performance Task Analysis template


     Five Whys Technique

     Based on some understanding of current conditions, use this tool to identify why
     the learning is less than optimal. Then use the root cause that is identified as the
     next challenge to be solved by the learning engineering team.


     The five whys technique was developed by Sakichi Toyoda, the founder of Toyota,
                                           Tools for Understanding the Challenge | 235



in the 1930s. Toyota executives would go and see what was happening on the shop
floor (rather than just think about solving a problem from the boardroom), and then
they’d use analysis techniques to examine the issues they identified. The five whys
is a root-cause analysis technique,* and it works well with other human-centered
design approaches. Learning engineers might use the five whys to figure out why
learners are failing at a given task or are challenged by a particular topic.3


HOW TO USE

In its simplest form, use this procedure: (1) Identify a problem, (2) ask why?, and
(3) based on that answer ask why? again. (Repeat up to five times—or more—as
needed.) Sometimes the root cause is discovered in fewer or more than five steps.
It’s helpful to unpack as much as possible. Don’t stop at the symptoms of problems.

Example: The vehicle will not start.
      1.   Why? The battery is dead.
      2.   Why? The alternator isn’t functioning.
      3.   Why? The alternator belt has broken.
      4.   Why? The alternator belt was beyond its useful life and not replaced.
      5.   Why? The vehicle wasn’t maintained to the suggested service schedule.
Note that sometimes depending on where you are in the learning engineering pro-
cess, you may have access to data or research that can inform the answers to your
root cause questions. This is exemplified in the next example where a root cause was
discovered with analysis of data and interviewing some learners to better understand
why they were having difficulties.

Example: Students are failing multiplication word problems on a standardized test.
      1. Why? Students are missing about half of the problems on the tests even
         though they performed better on in-class multiplication word problems.
      2. Why? Based on the data, students are missing the same sets of problems.
      3. Why? Examining the troublesome problems reveals that they all prompt
         students to “find the product” of two or more numbers.



* Caution: Not all problems have a single root cause. For more complex problems the method
  must be repeated asking a different sequence of questions each time. In those cases, use this
  method with the “fishbone diagrams” tool discussed later in this chapter.
236 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



           4. Why? Talking to the students reveals that they don’t know what the word
              “product” means in mathematics. (Note, during this step, it’s important
              to go talk with learners, just as the Toyota executives visited the shop
              floor to understand what was going on. A simple template like the one
              that follows may be used to assist with this.)
           5. Why? The teacher succeeded in ensuring that students in the class were
              proficient in multiplication as an operation but failed to expose them to
              the terminology used in the standardized assessment. In-class practice
              problems before the test didn’t use the word “product.”


     THE FIVE WHYS TOOL TEMPLATE
     Condition:

            Why?


            Why?


            Why?


            Why?


            Why?


     FIGURE 8.3. Five Whys template



     Cause and E!ect (Fishbone) Analysis

     This technique helps explore all possible causes of a problem. Use it to investigate
     the root causes of more complex or multifaceted challenges.


     The five whys technique is designed to help identify a single condition or root cause
     that, if changed, could result in an improvement or desired outcome. In contrast,
     cause and effect analysis, developed by Kaoru Ishikawa in the 1960s, is better suited
     for those situations where the multitude of root causes that might be preventing an
                                        Tools for Understanding the Challenge | 237



ideal outcome. This technique is also called fishbone analysis * because a completed
diagram can look like the skeleton of a fish. The technique is fully defined in the
1990 book, Introduction to Quality Control. 4


HOW TO USE 5

      1.   Start by asking why an ideal outcome isn’t being reached.
      2.   Instead of just one, consider multiple reasons.
      3.   Record each answer as a branch in the diagram.
      4.   For each branch ask why?, and record the answer as a subsequent branch
           until the various root causes are found.

Note, in the following example, interacting with the learners is essential to getting at
reasons for difficulties. You may need to use another tool, such as the five whys, to
get at the root causes of each of the identified difficulties.

Example: Some of our learners don’t automatically know that ¼ is greater than ⅛.
“Why don’t learners know the relative value of fractions?” Answering the question
may require some investigation, such as asking learners or doing follow-up assess-
ments. Let’s say we asked learners, “Why do you think ¼ is less than ⅛?” and they
provided these responses:

      “No one taught me about numbers with a line between them.” (From
      this we might theorize the learner wasn’t exposed to the idea of fractions
      or didn’t retain the concept from a prior learning experience.)

      “Because 8 is greater than 4.” (From this we can infer that their mental
      model for quantity is imperfect and must be expanded.)

      “Oh, I was wrong, I was looking at the numbers on the bottom and for-
      got it was a fraction.” (In this case, we might infer that the learner has
      been exposed to fractions but hasn’t yet sufficiently retained that knowl-
      edge or developed skills to consistently apply it.)

Starting with these three initial branches might result in a fishbone diagram as shown
in Figure 8.4.A, and based on this, we might identify different kinds of solutions as
shown in Figure 8.4.B.



* Also known as Cause and Effect, Ishikawa, Herringbone, and Fishikawa Diagrams.
238 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



                                 No one taught me                         The learner was
                                 about numbers                            introduced to fractions but
                                 with a line in                           didn’t retain the knowledge
                                 between


       CHALLENGE                                                          The learner hasn’t been
                                                                          introduced to fractions
        Learners don’t       Because 8 is more than 4
        know that ¼ is                                       The learner’s mental model
        greater than ⅛                                       doesn’t include the symbolic
                                                             representation of values less
                                                             than one as fractions

           WHY?                  Oh, I was wrong: I
                                                                          The learner needs more
                                 was looking at the
                                                                          exposure and practice to
                                 numbers on the
                                                                          consistently recognize and
                                 bottom and forgot
                                                                          apply knowledge of
                                 it was a fraction
                                                                          fractions


     FIGURE 8.4.A. Example fishbone diagram (step 1)




                                                                            (RE)INTRODUCE
                                                      …didn’t retain
                                                      the knowledge            CONCEPT
                             No one                                       Example Solutions
                             taught me…                                   • An orange cut into
                                                      …hasn’t been          sections

       CHALLENGE                                      introduced to       • Explain numerator and
                                                                            denominator
                                                      fractions
                                                                          • A number line with
        Learners don’t   Because 8 is more…                                 fractional symbols
        know that ¼ is                        …mental model
        greater than ⅛                        doesn’t include the
                                              symbolic
                                              representation…

           WHY?              Oh, I was                                 PRACTICE WITH
                             wrong…
                                                                         FEEDBACK
                                                      …needs more
                                                      exposure and
                                                      practice…


     FIGURE 8.4.B. Example fishbone diagram (step 2)
                                      Tools for Understanding the Challenge | 239



ALTERNATIVE FORM

The fishbone analysis template in Figure 8.5 is adapted from a model by the Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. It takes a slightly different approach,
for example, creating main category branches from the problem statement. Use it
when you want to organize potential causes by category, for example, separating
learner motivational or behavioral causes from learner cognition causes.




                                CATEGORY                              CATEGORY

                                   cause
                             cause
   PROBLEM
  STATEMENT
                                   cause
                                        cause

                                CATEGORY                              CATEGORY

FIGURE 8.5. Alternative fishbone diagram template
240 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Failure Mode and E!ects Analysis

     Use this technique to prioritize what challenge (or challenges) to address. This
     technique helps you look at all of the things that possibly could go wrong; it’s most
     useful at the beginning of the create stage to uncover and address potential prob-
     lems that would be more expensive to correct later. (Caution: Don’t let this process
     cause “analysis paralysis” that slows down Agile design and development.)


     This technique (originally known as failure mode, effects, and criticality analysis) was
     first published in 1949 by the US Department of Defense. The technique grew out of
     systems engineering and quality control. It builds on tools like cause and effect analysis
     to try to predict failures before they happen. Failure mode and effects analysis is
     also effective in improving the design of business processes and systems. When
     using it, start by looking in detail at the proposed solution and then identify where
     that solution might fail. 6


     HOW TO USE 7
     (One example process; there are variations.)
           1. Review the learning objectives, domain pedagogies, and what’s known
              about the learner population, learning environment, and other contexts.
           2. Brainstorm potential failure modes.
           3. List potential effects of each failure.
           4. Assign severity rankings. (That is, rate the severity of each effect.)
           5. Assign occurrence rankings.
           6. Assign detection rankings. (How likely is it the failure will be detected?)
           7. Calculate a risk priority number (severity × occurrence × detection).
           8. Develop the action plan (design and development requirements) to
              address the highest priorities.
            An example of failure mode and effect analysis comes from the Prince of
     Songkla University, Thailand, which used it to understand a challenge in their Indus-
     trial Engineering bachelor’s degree program.8 The program includes placing students
     in industrial settings for on-the-job training, but industry partners complained that
     students were being placed in jobs they weren’t yet capable of performing. University
     faculty used this analysis to uncover issues in the complex situation, which spanned
     diverse stakeholders, factors, and education / industrial contexts. They examined all
                                              Tools for Understanding the Challenge | 241



potential failure points and then evaluated each using five-point rubrics:
       1. Severity: Likelihood of the customer noticing the failure or the level of
          worst results, particularly in terms of safety and system functionality
          (5 = Student can’t do the job to 1 = Student comfortable with the job)
       2. Occurrence: Likelihood of a specific failure (5 = Very high probability
          of its occurrence to 1 = Very low probability of its occurrence)
       3. Detection: Degree of existing control plan or verification program that
          can pinpoint potential failures before they occur (5 = Can’t predict and
          no detection of failure to 1 = Can predict and detect)
      Next, they created a risk priority number, which is an index based on the
multiplication of severity by occurrence by detection metrics. An example of (part
of) what this analysis might have looked like is below:

       Failure Mode               Severity        Occurrence         Detection       Risk Priority
 Students lack key
                                      4                 4                 4                 64
 admin info about jobs
 Students lack
                                      4                 3                 4                 48
 essential skills
 Industry partners not
                                      4                 2                 3                 24
 accurately defining jobs

 ...                                 ...               ...               ...                ...

FIGURE 8.6. Partial example of how a failure mode and e!ects analysis might be
scored. The numeric scores in this figure are fictional for the purposes of illustration.

       After identifying all of the potential failure modes, the faculty then ranked
the top five most serious issues. Then the team used the five whys technique, pre-
sented earlier in this chapter, to uncover root cause. They found that four of the five
high-priority issues could have been prevented with better communications between
the department and the industrial partners. Only one of the top-five issues pointed
to the need to better prepare student before on-the-job training. Once they had that
clarity, they were able to identify actions to prevent each issue from reoccurring in
the future.
242 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Endnotes
     1 Rossett, Allison, and Kendra Sheldon. Beyond the Podium: Delivering Training and Performance
       to a Digital World. 1st ed. San Fancisco: Jossey-Bass / Pfeiffer, 2001.
     2 Clark, Donald. “Task Analysis in Instructional Design.” Instructional System Design: The ADDIE
       Model: A Handbook for Learning Designers. Last modified September 21, 2015.
       http://knowledgejump.com/hrd/isd/tasks.html
        Clark, Donald. “Task Analysis Tools.” Knowledge Jump. Last modified October 18, 2011.
        http://knowledgejump.com/hrd/needsalt.html
     3 Mind Tools Team. “5 Whys: Getting to the Root of a Problem Quickly.” Mind Tools. Last
       modified December 12, 2021. www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newTMC_5W.htm
     4 Ishikawa, Kaoru. Introduction to Quality Control. Japan: Taylor & Francis, 1990.
     5 See also: Mind Tools Team. “Cause and Effect Analysis: Identifying the Likely Causes of
       Problems.” Mind Tools. www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newTMC_03.htm
     6 Mind Tools Team. “Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA): Spotting Problems Before a
       Solution Is Implemented.” Mind Tools. Last modified December 12, 2021. www.mindtools.com/
       pages/article/newTMC_82.htm
     7 Venuk, Cecelia Marie. “Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (FMEA).” Presentation at the
       Albuquerque Quality Network Conference, Albuquerque, NM, February 23, 2012.
       www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/1097206
        “10 Steps to do a Process FMEA.” FMEA Training from QualityTrainingPortal. Accessed
        December 12, 2021. https://fmea-training.com/10-steps-process-failure-mode-and-effects-
        analysis
        Kane, Robert and Rosalie Kane. “Guidance for Performing Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
        with Performance Improvement Projects.” The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services,
        United States Department of Health and Human Services. Last modified February 18, 2014.
        www.cms.gov/Medicare/Provider-Enrollment-and-Certification/QAPI/downloads/
        GuidanceForFMEA.pdf
     8 Sinthavalai, Runchana and Napisporn Memongkol. “A Case of FMEA Implementation in the
       Educational Sector and Integration with CRM and QFD Concepts.” Paper presented at IEEE
       International Engineering Management Conference, Estoril, Portugal, June, 28–30, 2008. New
       York: IEEE. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/4618036
CHAPTER 9


Tools from the
Learning Sciences
by Jim Goodell, Janet Kolodner, and Aaron Kessler



This chapter builds on the foundations outlined in Chapter 2. It
summarizes concepts from the learning sciences, and it provides some
sca!olding to help organize your thinking around their application.


Before using these tools, you should have already examined the challenge (see
Chapter 8) and used a modular design approach to isolate specific opportunities or
problems to be addressed. First use the following checklist to consider the applicable
category or categories that apply to your challenge.

Learning Sciences Concept Categories—Check all that apply:
       Create or improve the conditions for learning
       Help learners understand new ideas
       Help learners retain knowledge
       Help learners apply knowledge
       Help learners build expertise
       Motivate learners
       Measure learning and optimize feedback

Next use the checklist that follows to identify concepts that apply. Then during iter-
ative design, development, and instrumentation; refer back to these checklists and
consider how your solution incorporates the relevant concepts. Use a worksheet to
track which concepts were implemented. Following the checklist on the next page,
the remainder of this chapter includes definitions of the learning sciences concepts
for reference. It also incorporates an example design pattern, to show how you might
integrate the learning sciences concepts into your learning designs.



DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-14
244 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



    CATEGORY          SAMPLE CONCEPTS TO CONSIDER
    Create or          Agency: What people think about their own learning matters
    improve the        Cognitive Capabilities: Improve learners’ capacity to learn
    conditions
    for learning       Hierarchy of Needs: Foster physiological / emotional well-being
                       Personalization: Use learner models to inform tailored interventions
                       Variability: Learning is di!erent for everyone
    Help learners      Concrete to Abstract: Start with concrete examples and then expand
    understand         Feedback: E!ective feedback is specific, timely, actionable . . .
    new ideas
                       Metacognition: Help grow or sca!old metacognitive thinking
                       Novice vs. Expert: Help novice learners see and build connections
                       Productive Failure: Safe failure (and feedback) can aid learning
                       Sca!olding: Give support to make the task just challenging enough
                       Spaced Learning: Mitigate forgetting by studying over time
    Help learners      Active Learning: Foster learning through doing
    retain             Cognitive Load: Avoid working memory overload
    knowledge
                       Connections: Emphasize cognitive connections and transferability
                       Personal Connection: Use authentic, personally meaningful tasks
                       Zone of Proximal Development: Find the “just right” challenge level
    Help learners      Challenge: Set the right level of desirable difficulty
    apply              Prior Experience: Remember, there’s no learning from scratch
    knowledge
                       Reinforce: Use it or lose it
                       Transfer: Help learners apply knowledge to new contexts
                       Unlearning: Help learners let go of biases and misconceptions
    Help learners      Communities: Foster real-world applications through social learning
    build expertise    Memory: Help build long-term (vs. working) memory
                       Mentorship: Model ideas and skills
                       Novice vs. Expert: Help novice learners see and build connections
    Motivate           Core Drives: Tap into learners’ core drives to foster motivation
    learners           Engagement: Motivation is learner-centric
                       Hierarchy of Needs: Foster physiological / emotional well-being
                       Motivation Types: Consider intrinsic vs. extrinsic motivators
                       Relevance: Use authentic, personally meaningful tasks
    Measure            Feedback: E!ective feedback is specific, timely, actionable . . .
    learning and       Metacognition: Help grow or sca!old metacognitive thinking
    optimize
    feedback           Novice vs. Expert: Help novice learners see and build connections
                       Productive Failure: Safe failure (and feedback) can aid learning
                       Sca!olding: Give support to make the task just challenging enough
                                             Tools from the Learning Sciences | 245



ACTIVE LEARNING: Foster learning through doing
Learners are more likely to engage enthusiastically and to be able to integrate what
they’re learning with their prior knowledge when asked to achieve a goal that is
meaningful to them, work on a project, or solve a problem. After learning their
new understanding or capability is more likely to be well integrated with what
they already know. However, such project-based learning only works well when
scaffolded so that learners understand the objectives, ask good questions, carry out
robust investigations to answer those questions, reflect on their experiences, and
take advantage of failures.

AGENCY: What people think about their own learning matters
Helping learners understand that many aspects of successful learning, such as
strategy and effort, are under their control fosters agency. Relatedly, when learners
see failure as an opportunity to find out what they still need to learn—rather than
an indicator of self-worth or fixed intelligence—they’re more likely to persevere. A
growth mindset is encouraged with process-focused feedback and an environment
that treats mistakes as opportunities to reflect and learn.

CHALLENGE: Set the right level of desirable difficulty
When learners work at the edge of their mastery (while maintaining high expectations
for performance) it pushes them past their current abilities. Like in athletics, while
practice isn’t always fun and drills can be difficult, a deliberate training process
leads to improvement. The right level of challenge with the right level of support
(scaffolding) promotes effective learning while offsetting the motivational and
cognitive costs of floundering and frustration.

COGNITIVE CAPABILITIES: Improve learners’ capacity to learn
Learning is dependent on general cognitive capacities such as attention, executive
function, working memory, and processing skills. When necessary, interventions
should be applied to develop or strengthen these cognitive capabilities.

COGNITIVE LOAD: Avoid working memory overload
Cognitive load is the effort used in working memory. Working memory (sometimes
referred to as short-term memory) is where new learning starts, but it has limited
capacity and requires greater mental effort. In some cases, a heavy cognitive load can
impede learning. Cognitive load theory suggests that learning experiences should be
246 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     designed so that they don’t overload working memory.

     COMMUNITIES: Foster real-world applications through social learning
     Learning communities (grounded in communities of practice) allow students to
     socially situate, construct, and organize knowledge compatible with experts in the
     domain. Encourage social learning through communities to help learners bridge the
     gap between academic understanding and real-world application.

     CONCRETE TO ABSTRACT: Start with concrete examples and then expand
     Learning starts with concrete information and gradually moves to more abstract
     understanding. Learners often need to start with imperfect but concrete conceptual
     models, anchored in a single context, and then over time replace those with more
     accurate and abstract understanding that can be applied to more than one problem
     or context.

     CONNECTIONS: Emphasize cognitive connections and transferability
     Does the learning experience or environment help learners make connections to prior
     learning? Does it help learners connect across knowledge domains, for example, to
     transfer something learned in school to a real-life task? Help make the connections
     among different concepts, or among theoretical ideas and real-world applications,
     obvious. Help learners practice using new knowledge or skills in different contexts
     or problem variations.

     CORE DRIVES: Tap into learners’ core drives to foster motivation
     People are motivated by different things at different times. Core drives include
     curiosity, meaningfulness, accomplishment, empowerment, ownership, social
     influence, scarcity, unpredictability, and avoidance. Good learning experiences and
     environments tap into these drives so that learners are motivated to engage deeply,
     remain engaged over time, and re-engage after becoming disengaged.

     See also Chapter 15, Tools for Learner Motivation, for specific strategies based on
     the science of motivation.
                                              Tools from the Learning Sciences | 247



ENGAGEMENT: Motivation is learner-centric
Learning isn’t something done to students by a teacher. It’s a process in the learner’s
brain of adding and changing existing knowledge. Learning only happens if learners
actively participate in the process. Learners are more likely to persevere if they
believe their talents can be developed through hard work, good strategies, and input
from others.

FEEDBACK: E!ective feedback is specific, timely, actionable . . .
Descriptive feedback gives learners information about the quality of their ideas and
performance that they can use to adjust. Deliver effective feedback, which is specific,
understandable, timely, non-threatening, and actionable.

HIERARCHY OF NEEDS: Foster physiological / emotional well-being
Before higher levels of motivation can be attained, a person’s basic survival needs
(for example, not starving and feeling safe) and psychological needs (for example,
belonging and esteem) must be met, more or less. Learners with good nutrition,
sleep, and exercise will have better cognitive skills. Aerobic exercise can improve
brain plasticity. Sleep is critical for solidifying learning. Nutrition is important for
brain health. Similarly, learners who feel they’re a part of a positive, supportive
learning community will be better able to focus on learning. To the extent possible,
set these conditions to enable learning.

MEMORY: Help build long-term (vs. working) memory
The difference between a novice and an expert brain has a lot to do with how each
uses the two kinds of memory. Working (short-term) memory is slower, error prone,
more deliberate, has limited capacity and limited retention, requires greater mental
effort, and is the place where new learning starts. In contrast, long-term memory has
long retention, is efficient, operates automatically (without effort), and when trained
error-free. Experts use long-term memory to do complex tasks effortlessly. Help
novices grow their long-term memory by exposing them to many varied patterns
of a concept and by helping them grow, connect, and enhance their mental models.
248 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     MENTORSHIP: Model ideas and skills
     Mentor learners by modeling of ideas and skills while engaging in real world
     activities. This allows novice learners to begin developing expertise. Instructional
     tactics such as demonstration and talk-aloud can help.

     METACOGNITION: Help grow or sca!old metacognitive thinking
     Metacognition is thinking about one’s own thinking and learning. A metacognitive
     learner knows when they’re on the right track and when they’re having difficulties.
     Metacognitive strategies include self-explanation, asking for help, starting over, and
     persevering. A good way of helping learners develop metacognition is to prompt
     them to reflect on or articulate what they’re learning—metacognitive scaffolding.
     Did I already know that? How would I explain that to someone else? Does it conflict
     with what I thought I knew or could do? How well do I know this? On what parts
     of this do I need help or more practice? For measurement and feedback, consider
     assessing learners’ metacognitive skills. Also, develop assessments that prompt
     learners to express their thought processes (rather than just giving a final answer).
     See the design pattern below for an example of how to help learners build their
     metacognitive skills through prompting.

     MOTIVATION TYPES: Consider intrinsic vs. extrinsic motivators
     Intrinsic motivators (internal goals) tend to be more powerful than extrinsic rewards.
     Use strategies, such as those outlined in Chapter 15, to foster intrinsic motivation.

     NOVICE VS. EXPERT: Help novice learners see and build connections
     Compared to novices, experts not only have more content knowledge, they’ve also
     organized that knowledge for deeper understanding, rapid retrieval, and contextual
     application. Experts can see patterns and understand under which conditions and
     contexts to apply knowledge. Experts can also select and retrieve important aspects
     of their knowledge without effort. It may be necessary to help learners restructure
     their knowledge so that it’s organized more like the knowledge of experts. That
     takes intentional practice with feedback. Explicitly help learners see and practice
     building connections between concepts at each level of learning. Also, when it
     comes to measurement and feedback, consider measuring efficiency of application
     and transferability (not just retrieval of discrete facts and highly contextualized
     skills) as learners move from novice to experts.
                                             Tools from the Learning Sciences | 249



PERSONALIZATION: Use learner models to inform tailored interventions
In one-on-one tutoring, tutors construct mental models of what a learner knows
and can do based on observations and interactions. In intelligent tutoring systems,
learner models are dynamically built from data about a learner and their interactions.
In both cases these models are useful for diagnosis, feedback, coaching, and the
prescription of learning activities. Tailoring such interventions to learners’ unique
cognition, metacognition, and motivational factors can greatly improve learning
outcomes.

See also Chapter 13, Data Instrumentation Tools, for more insights on collection of
data used to optimize feedback.


PRIOR EXPERIENCE: Remember, there’s no learning from scratch
Learning is an active process in which a learner constructs meaning by mapping
new information onto prior knowledge. As we experience life our brains try to fit
new information into what we already know about the world. Learning works best
when we have the background knowledge to make sense of the new information.
Learning doesn’t work if the prerequisite knowledge on which to anchor the new
knowledge is missing. Help learners by understanding their prior experiences and
then connecting new knowledge or skills to them.

PRODUCTIVE FAILURE: Safe failure (and feedback) can aid learning
Failure provides an opportunity to learn. When a learner tries out some thinking or
a new skill and it doesn’t work as well as they expected, the opportunity presents
itself to figure out why and correct or improve their capabilities. Use a wrong answer
during learning-embedded assessments as an opportunity to provide feedback, or
provide feedback on project-based activities that help learner reflect on why they
failed and how to correct those issues, gaps, or misconceptions in the future.

REINFORCE: Use it or lose it
A newly learned skill or knowledge component is generally forgotten over time if
not reinforced with practice and applied. Use techniques like spaced learning, or
create tasks that require learners to build upon and practice their new knowledge and
skills, so that they’re reinforced over time.
250 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     In Chapter 4, Learning Engineering is Engineering, we introduced design
     patterns—repeatable solutions to commonly occurring engineering
     problems. The following design pattern is an example of an instructional
     strategy that addresses the learning sciences concept of metacognition.



     Example Design Pattern: Metacognitive Prompting *

       Explicit verbal, text, or visual reminders prompt learners to engage in specific
       cognitive processes, such as remembering previous instructions. Metacognitive
       prompting involves asking questions and giving reminders that encourage
       metacognitive thinking such as planning, monitoring, and evaluating one’s
       thinking processes.


     How It Works: Metacognitive prompts are designed to enhance metacognitive
     skills, including self-awareness, self-monitoring, self-regulation, reflective judg-
     ment (evaluating the accuracy of knowledge), integrative thinking (integrating sepa-
     rate pieces of information or seemingly opposing perspectives), and emotional intel-
     ligence (the ability to understand one’s own and others’ emotions). These skills act
     as a “multiplier” to all other cognitive competencies. Metacognitive strategies help
     learners to independently make sense of situations, transfer their knowledge to new
     contexts, and evaluate themselves. These skills also help learners better plan, prac-
     tice, evaluate their own learning then adjust their behavior to best meet their goals.

     Applicable Contexts: All

     Inputs: None required

     Instrumentation: None required

     Design Considerations: Is the learner already familiar with the concept of
     “metacognition,” or at least, the value of metacognitive skills like self-awareness
     and self-regulation? Will you incorporate the prompts before, during, and / or after
     a learning activity? Will you use metacognitive prompts as a self-directed, teacher-
     led, or group activity?


     * Schatz et al. (2012). Making Good Instructors Great: US Marine Corps Small Unit Decision Mak-
       ing Instructional and Assessment Techniques Handbook, pp. 84–85.
                                              Tools from the Learning Sciences | 251



Pattern:

 1. Explain the concept of metacognition and its benefits. Use direct instruction
    to help learners initially understand the distinction between “thinking” (that
    is, cognition) and “thinking about thinking” (that is, metacognition). Explain
    core metacognitive skills and how these skills “multiply” learning and cogni-
    tive performance.
 2. Before, during, and / or after an activity that introduces new concepts, help
    learners activate metacognitive thinking through questions or prompting.
    First, determine which phases to add the prompts into.

     • Preparation (Pre): Metacognitive prompts during the preparation phase
       generally involve planning, such as encouraging learners to set goals,
       organize their thoughts, anticipate, or predict.
     • Execution (During): Prompts during execution often involve monitoring,
       such as summarizing or elaborating on new concepts, self-assessing
       comprehension, or using mental strategies (like mnemonic devices).
     • Reflection (Post): Metacognitive prompts during the reflective phase
       generally involve evaluating, such as self-assessing performance, reflecting
       on feedback, or considering ways to apply the recent lesson.
 3. Next, determine which metacognitive skills are most appropriate to activate
    and how to prompt them. These can be delivered asynchronously (such as via
    automated scripts in an e-learning course), by a teacher (such as through tutor-
    ing or mentorship), or drawn out through peer-learning activities.
     Here are some examples:
     •     Frame: Ask how individual parts fit into an overall task
     •     Attend: Cue learners to the critical pieces of information
     •     Self-Regulate: Ask learners what “mental tricks” they use
     •     Extend: Ask about similar concepts that relate to the lesson
     •     Reflect: Ask learners to describe (paraphrase) what they just learned
     •     Experiment: Make learners “stretch” to solve new problems

 4. Prompt learners. If possible engage in a dialogue to encourage reflection.
 5. In a group setting, consider leading a group discussion. Allot time for the dis-
    cussion and encourage learners to describe the metacognitive strategies that
    they personally found useful.
252 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     RELEVANCE: Use authentic, personally meaningful tasks
     Learners are more likely to become intrinsically motivated and engaged over long
     periods of time if what they’re asked to do is personally meaningful and authentic,
     if they imagine they’re capable, if they know when and who in the world carries
     out such tasks, if they have the available resources that someone in the real world
     engaging in that task would have, and if associated activities and assessments fit into
     the flow of what they’re trying to achieve. Learners often need help to know how
     a new learning experience is meaningful to them and encouragement that they’re
     capable of learning the associated knowledge and skills.

     SCAFFOLDING: Give support to make the task just challenging enough
     Scaffolding provides the structure and support learners need to construct their own
     learning with tasks more complex than they could handle without that support.
     Scaffolding includes hints, prompts, conceptual frameworks (for example, advance
     organizers), process support, focus support, and strategic guidance. Its goal is
     to provide just enough support to make tasks achievable without losing useful
     complexity or context. Scaffolding may be added and removed based on each
     learner’s current needs. For measurement and feedback, build in the opportunity for
     learners to get hints and worked examples during formative assessments. If possible,
     use data to adjust the level of difficulty for an assessment task, removing and adding
     scaffolding for a desired level of difficulty.

     SPACED LEARNING: Mitigate forgetting by studying over time
     Studying the same amount of content over time (rather than cramming all at once)
     can dramatically improve learning, long-term recall and flexible use of that content.
     Increasing the time between repetitions over time is most effective.

     TRANSFER: Help learners apply knowledge to new contexts
     Transfer refers to ability to apply existing knowledge and skills to new contexts.
     Transfer is difficult. It requires recognition that you know something, understanding
     of how to apply it in a new context or form, and the disposition to do so. Often,
     learners can use existing knowledge when prompted before they can independently
     recognize that their knowledge is relevant. Being able to transfer learning requires
     practice in a variety of circumstances. Create varied conditions and coach learners on
     what knowledge or skills might be useful for different contexts. The better someone
     can reuse their knowledge, the more robust their learning becomes.
                                                Tools from the Learning Sciences | 253



UNLEARNING: Help learners let go of biases and misconceptions
Sometimes a learner has mistaken, imperfect, or incomplete mental models that must
be replaced with corrected or improved ones. Developers of learning experiences
should not only know the subject matter but also common points of learner confusion
and how to address them. Use formative assessments and other opportunities to
identified learners’ gaps, biases, and misconceptions, and then help them unlearn
those unhelpful ideas or skills.

VARIABILITY: Learning is di!erent for everyone
Existing knowledge is the foundation on which new learning is anchored. New
learning is also dependent on cognitive capacities such as attention, executive func-
tion, working memory, and processing skills.* All of these personal characteristics
are variable. In addition, different cultural influences and experiences impact devel-
opment from the beginning of life. To be most effective, it’s important to consider
learners’ variability and, to the extent possible, tailor learning experiences to work
with and build upon those individual or group differences.

ZONE OF PROXIMAL DEVELOPMENT: Find the “just right” challenge level
Tasks that are outside of a learner’s current independent ability—but that are achievable
with help (scaffolding)—are within a learner’s Zone of Proximal Development.
Every learner’s zone is different, and a learner’s zone is different at different points
in time. Learning activities should be adaptive or adaptable to consider the probable
zones and to provide the relevant scaffolding required for success. Good scaffolding
helps learners succeed past what they can do by themselves and helps them grow
their capabilities over time.




* Note: There is no evidence that people have particular fixed learning styles (for example,
  visual versus auditory). Learners’ preferred mode of learning may vary over time, by
  context, and by learning objective. Adaptive and adaptable learning experiences offer
  multiple modes and levels that consider differences in the learners to be served.
CHAPTER 10


Tools for Teaming
by Dina Kurzweil and Erin S. Barry*



Learning engineering requires a team. This chapter defines teams and
learning engineering teams. It examines stages of team development,
practices for team formation, and shared competencies of a learning
engineering team. Finally, this chapter provides insights about e!ective
team communication and common barriers faced by teams with
strategies for overcoming team dysfunctions.



What’s a team?
      A team is a small number of people . . . who are committed to a com-
      mon purpose, performance goals, and approach for which they hold
      themselves mutually accountable.1

For teams to be effective, the common purpose or goal needs to be clear so that team
members can work interdependently to achieve the common outcome.
       Additionally, team members should have a shared commitment and
responsibility to complete the common purpose or goal. It’s important for all
members of the team to understand each member’s role and expectations and have
mutual respect for what each person brings to the table. On some teams, the leader
sets the vision, selects the members of the team, and sets out the procedures to
follow, while the team members execute accordingly. In contrast, other teams allow
all team members to contribute to decision-making about vision, selection of team
members, and procedures in addition to the execution of tasks. To have effective


* The opinions or assertions contained herein are the private ones of the authors and are
  not to be construed as official or reflecting the views of the Department of Defense, the
  Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, or any other agency of the US
  government. The authors have no financial disclosures.


DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-15
256 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     team performance, cohesiveness, morals, and ultimately outcomes, the team should
     clearly understand who’s involved in each step, and they should have the flexibility
     to change these dynamics based on evolving contexts and situations. Finally, teams
     should periodically have meaningful discussions about the overall goals as well as
     roles of each team member. This helps to maintain a positive and safe environment
     where team members feel comfortable speaking up.2


     Why have a team?
     Why should we work in a team? Everyone has unique experiences, perspectives,
     opinions, gifts, communication and leadership styles, strengths, and weaknesses
     that, when brought together, strengthen potential solutions and can solve problems
     that couldn’t otherwise be solved alone. When dealing with larger or complex
     problems, the power of a team can far exceed any one person’s ability. It’s extremely
     rare for someone to independently have all of the capabilities needed to take on
     learning engineering challenges including expertise in engineering processes,
     learning sciences, software engineering, data science, instructional design, artificial
     intelligence and machine learning, pedagogy and andragogy, user experience design,
     and product testing as well as mastery of regulatory policies and technical standards.


     What’s a learning engineering team?
     Learning engineering teams bring together specialists who can help transform
     learning environments, expand best practices, implement learner-centered design,
     and enable data-driven decisions. These specialists have a combination of knowledge
     and experience as well as the ability to filter their individual knowledge through the
     lenses of their combined experience. In other words, the value of effective teams
     doesn’t only come from each member’s own abilities; it also comes from their
     abilities to work together.


     Learning Engineering Team Composition
     Different learning engineering challenges require different mixes of talent, but they
     typically require contributions from the following domains:
            Assessment, measurement, and evaluation
            Data science
                                                               Tools for Teaming | 257



         Education and training professions
         Instructional design
         Learning environment engineering
         Learning experience design
         Learning sciences
         Project management
         Software engineering
       Subject-matter expertise


Team Organization
While organizations may be managed operationally around functional teams, learn-
ing engineering teams may require cross-disciplinary effort drawn from differ-
ent departments. For example, dynamic or interworking teams may be needed to
complete particular tasks. Carnegie Learning’s bi-weekly “data jams” described in
Chapter 6 are an example of this. Below are some different types of teams that can
be found within organizations:
  ► Dynamic or task force teams: These teams are brought together to quickly
      address a task or problem and are dissolved once it’s been completed or solved.
  ► Functional teams: Functional teams are more enduring. Their members
      belong to the same functional area and respond to a single leader, who’s
      responsible for the team and its outcomes. This type of team doesn’t dissolve
      once a project is complete; instead they move on to a new project together.
  ► Interworking teams: These teams are made up of members from different
      areas of activity, and their members usually have the same hierarchical level.
      This type of team usually comes together to focus on a task or problem with a
      multidisciplinary view, and the team dissolves once the project is completed.
  ► Matrixed teams: Matrixed team members usually belong to different
      functional areas and respond to different managers or leaders, but an
      organization assembles them into a temporary team to implement a specific
      project. After its completion, the team dissolves. Typically, members of
      matrixed teams perform other tasks related to their home department, but as
      far as the project is concerned, they answer to the project leader.
258 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Team Formation
     Every learning engineering challenge is different, and the work required in each
     stage of the learning engineering process also varies. The mix of talents needed,
     the roles assigned to team members, the contributions required for each role, and
     the overall work will vary by challenge and stage. For example, the implementation
     phase requires a different team composition than creation phase. Similarly, imple-
     mentation of a global learning platform like Duolingo requires a different team than
     implementation of a single course delivered to a few students or the design of donkey
     carts in West Africa to get children to school. Even when the reporting structures
     and titles for people in an organization are relatively static, the composition of teams
     and assigned roles should be aligned with the challenge, context, and work required
     for the given stage of a project. It may be helpful to think of team formation (or
     re-formation) as a step between each phase of the learning engineering process.
     Between stages of the learning engineering process ask:
           •   What problem is the team being formed to solve?
           •   What team competencies are required to address the problem’s context?
           •   What are the organizational contexts in which the team must operate?
           •   How will the organizational contexts dictate the work to be done and the
               processes that need to be followed?

                                                                                       PHASES
                                                                                                  Implementation

                                                                                                                   Investigation
                                                                           Challenge

                                                                                       Creation




      WHAT AREAS OF EXPERTISE ARE NEEDED?
      Assessment, measurement, and evaluation
      Data science
      Education and training professions
      Instructional design
      Learning environment engineering
      Learning experience design
      Learning sciences
      Project management
      Software engineering
      Subject-matter expertise
     FIGURE 10.1. Worksheet for team roles by learning engineering process phase
                                                                 Tools for Teaming | 259



TEAM VARIATION WITHIN THE LEARNING ENGINEERING PROCESS

The learning engineering process, defined in Chapter 1, is iterative. (It’s not a linear
process!) Steps may be revisited multiple times before moving on, and steps may
be revisited again throughout the process. Similarly, learning engineering team
development takes on many forms, is iterative, and can be repeated at any stage. The
team member roles and overall composition may need to evolve over time. Teams
may need to integrate new people based on requirements and expertise at each stage
of the process. The following describes eight team functions. Figure 10.2 shows
these functions mapped to the learning engineering process from Chapter 1.

      1. Developing: During the challenge phase, the team develops a firm ground-
         ing in the problem or challenge. These are often complex and will likely
         require decisions about what’s to be done.
      2. Coalescing: Also during the challenge phase, the team works together to
         understand the context of the problem and problem space. They should
         have at least one advocate who has a firm grounding in the context of the
         learners (and other stakeholders). That advocate (or advocates) must be
         able to explain the situation to the rest of the team.
      3. Assigning: The talents needed from each team member and their align-
         ment to a particular aspect of the problem will depend on the specific
         problem to be addressed. Make sure to reassess and reassign members
         between stages of the learning engineering process either by adjusting the
         team composition, each person’s expected contributions, or by handing off
         the project or tasks to a separate team.
      4. Planning: During the creation phase, the team plans how it will address the
         challenge using multiple rounds of iterative development. They also curate
         internal products to guide the work, such as standards, experimentation
         protocols, and style guides. This stage should also include plans for who
         will provide peer review and who will provide final sign-offs.
      5. Developing: Also during the creation phase, the appropriate team mem-
         bers will iteratively develop products and instrumentation to address the
         challenge, testing each iteration with end users. Subgroups or individuals
         may focus on developing parts of the overall solution, including instru-
         mentation and implementation plans.
      6. Implementing: During the implementation phase, the team must be
260 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



              prepared to support the implementation of the product and to document
              any issues that arise. This may mean adjustment of implementation plans
              as well as tactical and personnel challenges.
          7. Analyzing: During the investigation phase, the team examines the solu-
             tion’s ability to fully and ideally solve the problem. This is a critical re-
             view point. Upon completion of an analysis the team might discover, for
             example, that it needs more data, additional or different testing, or to make
             new design decisions. In other words, following the analysis phase, it’s
             likely that the learning engineering team will need to revisit one of the
             prior stages (or repeat the analyzing phase with variations).
          8. Iterating: Team members working on each stage of the process must
             look for opportunities to improve the solution in future iterations. Each
             member is responsible for contributing to continuous improvements—
             examining what’s working in the current iteration as well as what might
             be a challenge or opportunity for the next.



                                                                  3
                                                                        TE
                                                                           AM
                                     S
                                  ER
                                                                            CREATION
                              N
                           AR




                                                                         including designing,
                        LE




                                         1                             building solutions, data
                                                                           instrumentation,
                                                                        implementation plans
                                             1
                                                                         4        5               8
                                                 CHALLENGE
                                                Understand the
                                             opportunity to improve
                INVESTIGATION                 learning or learning
                 with data analysis                conditions



                    7

                                                                  IMPLEMENTATION
                                                                      with data collection
                                                  2
                                                                                      6
                                                 CONTE X T




     FIGURE 10.2. Suggested phases during which to apply the outlined team processes
                                                               Tools for Teaming | 261



TEAM DYNAMICS

Bruce Tuckman, an early psychology researcher focused on team dynamics, devel-
oped a four-phase model of the team development process that provides a framework
on the nature of team dynamics and their evolution. The four stages are:

      1. Forming: In this stage, individuals are trying to get to know each other
         and the organization and have not formed a commitment to the team. Proj-
         ect leaders provide direction and outline expectations. Leaders can also
         facilitate a discussion about the results to help the group understand each
         other, their differences, operating and communication styles.
      2. Storming: In this typically rocky stage, team members may challenge
         the leader and each other. The leader coaches members on how to manage
         conflict and focus on goals. The leaders also facilitate related training.
      3. Norming: After individuals have worked through conflicts, the team
         begins to develop. People begin to appreciate differences and work together.
         The leader begins to be more of a facilitator, offering encouragement and
         guidance.
      4. Performing: At this stage, the team is fully functional, members are
         able to manage their relationships, and work toward shared goals. Team
         members feel accepted and communicate openly with the leader. The
         leader focuses on delegating responsibilities and must identify when the
         team is moving into a different stage.


TEAM LEADERSHIP

The choice of who leads a team should account for context. Some teams are small,
such as an instructional designer teaming with an instructor. Larger teams who are
collectively designing learning experiences, platforms, or other complex solutions
may need a project manager who coordinates across the various other specialists
and sets the direction for the work. Similarly, as teams go through different stages
of development, different styles of leadership should be considered for optimal team
performance. During the earlier stages of team development, the leader may need
to be more involved and directive. When teams get to the norming and performing
stages, shared leadership becomes more realistic as everyone understands each oth-
er’s roles and can step in with their needed expertise.
262 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     TEAM CHECKLIST

     Teams formed to address any part of a learning engineering process can leverage
     general team building principles to move from storming to norming and performing.
     Use the checklist below as a guide to move through team formation processes:

        Develop ground rules
         It’s important to develop ground rules, such as how to deal with accelerated
         or delayed project timelines, how concerns will be handled, who to talk to
         about what and when, and how to promote the work of others and the team.

        Have clearly defined roles
         Each member must understand their own role as well as the roles of others.
         This will help members to know what they’re doing, how they can help each
         other when needed, and how to avoid stepping on others’ toes.

        Create a vision and goals
         The team must have a clear way ahead that’s known by all members. The
         vision doesn’t prescribe details of every step on the path forward.

        Provide clear communication
         Communication at all organizational levels must be clear for all to understand.

        Build trust and cooperation
         Once the team is formed, its members must have mutual trust and be willing
         to cooperate with one another. Without those, failure is inevitable.

        Value ideas
         Team members must value each other’s ideas and contributions. If team
         members don’t feel valued, they won’t feel like part of the team, leading to
         lower performance and satisfaction.

        Acknowledge unstated feelings
         Leaders must acknowledge and use social awareness to account for others’
         behaviors and emotions. If a team member isn’t pleased with a certain path
         and it’s noticed by the leader, it’s useful to acknowledge that not everyone
         may agree with the path forward and allow for all thoughts to be heard.

        Allow sharing (and often)
         All members of the team need to share ideas and thoughts around the project.
         Being heard allows individuals to feel like a part of the team.
                                                                 Tools for Teaming | 263



Communication
Communication is an important aspect for teams to be effective and successful.
Communication includes providing a clear message (sending), and importantly, it
also includes making sure that the message sent is understood by the person re-
ceiving the message (receiving). Communication is both verbal (using words) and
nonverbal (sounds, facial expressions, body language, and paralanguage). When
communication is clear, open, and honest, there’s increased trust on the team and
decreased conflict.


COMPETENCIES OF TEAM MEMBERS

Learning engineering teams will be more successful if they have some knowledge
of concepts and vocabulary used in the domains of the other professional specialties
on the team. For example, if a software engineer on the team knows something about
terms used by learning scientists, and if the instructional designer knows about some
of the ways that learning analytics can provide insights. This shared vocabulary
will help all team members work more effectively together. It’s also important that
a member or some members of the team can communicate well with stakeholders,
clients, and leaders of the organization they’re supporting.


COMMUNICATION STYLES

It’s important for us to understand our own communication styles as well as those
of others. There are many tools available to look at communication styles; one tool,
called DISC, is illustrated in Figure 10.3. It helps you identify your preferred style
of communication (dominance, influence, steadiness, correctness) and information
about the other styles. It’s a great tool to use with teams to provide awareness on each
person’s communication style to help you modify your behaviors. Adapting to others’
communication styles can help ensure that the message sent is the message received.
One of many DISC assessment tools is available online at: www.extendeddisc.org/
what-is-disc.


Team Functioning and Dysfunctioning
Some common characteristics seem to be strong indicators of a team that isn’t func-
tioning at its peak or that needs intervention. What makes good teams and what
264 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




      DOMINANCE                                                       INFLUENCING
       Decisive                                                        Decisive
                                                                        Persuasive
       Intense                       D                           I Intense
                                                                     Inspiring
       Competitive                                                     Competitive
                                                                        Enthusiastic


       Analytical                                                        Cooperative
       Contentious                   C                          S        Steady
       Systematic                                                        Patient
      CAUTIOUS                                                        STABILIZING




      DOMINANCE                 INFLUENCING         STABILIZING           CAUTIOUS
      Forceful                  Expressive          Restrained            Compliant
      Strong-minded             Emotional           Satisfied             Careful
      Pioneering                Influential         Easy mark             Correct
      Domineering               Attractive          Willing               Precise
      Determined                Stimulating         Even-tempered         Fussy
      Demanding                 Captivating         Patient               Timid
      Self-reliant              Companionable       Kind                  Open-minded
      Persistent                Playful             Self-controlled       Agreeable
      High-spirited             Talkative           Good-natured          Soft-spoken
      Impatient                 Convincing          Contented             Resigned
      Aggressive                Good mixer          Gentle                Respectful
      Nervy                     Poised              Accommodating         Conventional
      Argumentative             Confident           Relaxed               Cooperative
      Restless                  Inspiring           Considerate           Well-disciplined
      Courageous                Optimistic          Sympathetic           Diplomatic
      Positive                  Eager               Lenient               Exacting
      Adventurous               Enthusiastic        Loyal                 Adaptable
      Will power                Entertaining        Good listener         Humble
      Competitive               Life-of-the-party   Obedient              Tolerant
      Vigorous                  Persuasive          Neighborly            Cautious
      Outspoken                 Eloquent            Reserved              Strict
      Dogged                    Animated            Obliging              Devout
      Assertive                 Gregarious          Nonchalant            Docile
      Bold                      Outgoing            Moderate              Perfectionist

     FIGURE 10.3. Communication styles based upon the DISC model
     Table CC-BY the Chute Institute, 2013
                                                                    Tools for Teaming | 265



makes bad teams? See the tool in Figure 10.4 for qualities of dysfunctional teams as
well as ways to work towards fixing these qualities to improve team performance.
      For teams to be effective, there are many elements that need to be considered in
order for all members of the team to work effectively. Team members who embrace
and encourage both leader and follower roles are beneficial for team collaboration.
For effective team performance, cohesiveness, morals, leadership, planning
documentation, and communication plans should be clearly understood. Identify
who’s involved in each step, and have flexibility for changing context and situations.
The characteristics and competencies of the team should be formally recognized.
Finally, teams should have meaningful discussions of the overall goals and roles of
each team member to maintain a positive and a safe environment for all members to
speak up and share thoughts and ideas at any time.3


TEAM DYSFUNCTION AND IMPROVEMENT STRATEGIES

DYSFUNCTIONS             WHAT TO DO TO BE EFFECTIVE
Lack of trust            • Be genuine and show vulnerability
                         • Understand your role and team members’ roles
Avoidance of
accountability           • Hold each other accountable
                         • Use open, honest communication
Lack of cohesion         • Provide constructive feedback
                         • Frame conflict as positive
                         • Address the conflict in a timely manner
                         • Use open, honest communication
Unaddressed or
unresolved conflicts     • Maintain mutual respect
                         • Listen—not just to respond but to hear other perspectives
                         • Work toward resolution so that all parties feel like they’re
                           heard and valued and reach agreement with next steps
                         • Clearly describe roles and responsibility for each member
                         • Clearly communicate roles / responsibilities to the team
                         • Value all team members
Inequality among         • Find ways to show that each member is part of the team
team members             • Find ways to train members to meet their needs on the team
                         • Help team members reach individual goals for themselves
                         • Consider the context of the situation, as it may determine
                           who can / is able to do certain tasks
266 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




      DYSFUNCTIONS              WHAT TO DO TO BE EFFECTIVE
      Ine!ective                • Communicate, communicate, communicate!
      communication             • Use clear, open communication
      and communication         • Make sure that the message sent is the message received
      breakdowns                • Listen to understand, not to respond
      Lack of commitment        • Determine deadlines and who’s involved in meeting them
                                • Commit to decisions with confidence
      Inattention to results    • Focus on team / collective results
      Not adaptable
                                • Use techniques from team dynamics and above in this table
      Unsupportive team         • Help members to adapt to changing contexts
      environments / negative   • Allow members to support each other
      atmosphere / culture

                                • Identify leadership’s motivation
      Weak leadership           • Identify triggers for weak decision-making
                                • Follow the chain of command if necessary
                                • Consider context for poor decisions
      Poor decision-            • Add more time to the decision-making process
      making                    • Look to others for more ideas
                                • Develop multiple paths for decisions and track outcomes
                                • Educate your team
                                • Commit to diversity of thought
                                • Attack head on, biases, styles, etc. that limit diversity
      Diversity not valued      • Acknowledge that silence doesn’t mean there’s no problem
                                • Discuss body language and language in general
                                • Consider the e!ects of power on diversity of thoughts,
                                  ideas, creativity, and outcomes
                                • Develop a goal for the team and clearly communicate it
      Lack of goal
      and objectives            • Allow input from others (those above, below, and peers)
      for the team                to make sure the goal is measurable and achievable,
                                  while also meeting the mission of the organization
                                • Have clearly defined roles for each member of the
      Poorly defined roles        team (think short job descriptions for each person)
      and responsibilities
                                • Communicate these role descriptions with the entire team

     FIGURE 10.4 Team dysfunction and resolution cheat sheet
                                                                           Tools for Teaming | 267



Endnotes
1   Katzenbach, John R., and Dennis K. Smith. “The Discipline of Teams.” Harvard Business Review,
    March–April (1993), https://hbr.org/1993/03/the-discipline-of-teams-2
2   Barry, Erin S., Karlen S. Bader-Larsen, Holly S. Meyer, Steven J. Durning, and Lara Varpio.
    “Leadership and Followership in Military Interprofessional Health Care Teams.” Military
    Medicine 186, no. Supplement_3 (2021): 7–15.
3   Barry et al., Military Medicine, 7–15.
    Hackman, J. Richard. Leading Teams: Setting the Stage for Great Performances. Harvard
    Business Press, 2002.
CHAPTER 11


Lean-Agile
Development Tools
by Michelle Barrett and Jim Goodell



This chapter introduces Agile development approaches commonly used
in software development and explains how these tools can be used with
the learning engineering process.


Managing work across functions, time, and budget is difficult, and each manage-
ment strategy has pros and cons. We present a variety of management approaches
well suited to learning engineering.


Agile Development
Agile is a set of methods and methodologies that help a team to think more effectively,
work more efficiently, and make better decisions. Agile is also a mindset, which
opens up the planning, design, and process improvement to the team. Everyone
shares the same information, and everyone on the team has a say in how the practices
are applied.
      Agile was originally coined in February 2001 by a group of software engineers
who were tired of seeing software development projects fail. Frustrated by delivering
software customers didn’t like after years of development, they envisioned a better
and more collaborative way of working that would engage customers early and often
to mitigate the risk that what was being built was not what was wanted, thereby
accommodating change.
      To change a way of working deeply ingrained in many organizations is no
small feat. So those engineers, self-described as “organizational anarchists,” devel-
oped the Agile Manifesto.1




DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-16
270 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



           We are uncovering better ways of developing
           software by doing it and helping others do it.
           Through this work we have come to value:

           Individuals and interactions over processes and tools
           Working software over comprehensive documentation
           Customer collaboration over contract negotiation
           Responding to change over following a plan

           That is, while there is value in the items on
           the right, we value the items on the left more.

            Along with the Manifesto, several principles were developed, the first of which
     is satisfying the customer through early and continuous delivery of software. Since
     the introduction of the Agile Manifesto, professionals other than software engineers
     have noticed that applying Agile practices to their work has similarly improved their
     ability to respond to change to better meet customer needs. We’ll return to outline
     some of the practices that have been successfully used in a learning engineering
     context. But first, a quick detour through Lean.


     Lean Development
     Lean has roots in manufacturing, specifically, automotive manufacturing. Eiji
     Toyoda, nephew to the founder of Toyota, experimented with methods to make
     the Toyota manufacturing lines deliver productivity, quality, and variety. What he
     developed was an approach that became the Toyota Production System. Based on
     a study of this system, Lean principles were first described in The Machine that
     Changed the World: The Story of Lean Production—Toyota’s Secret Weapon in the
     Global Car Wars That Is Now Revolutionizing World Industry.2
           Lean principles are all about removing delay and waste, which is defined as
     any action or step in a process that doesn’t add value to the customer. Waste can in-
     clude defects, overproduction, waiting, transportation, inventory, motion, and extra
     processing. To eliminate waste, a relentless focus on continuous improvement is
     employed. Problems are seen as learning opportunities and teams are tasked with
     making improvements in response to those opportunities.
           You’ll see Lean in many contexts now, including manufacturing, entrepre-
     neurship, analytics, organizational design and process, and—you got it—Agile.
     Lean-Agile combines the principles of Lean (continuous improvement) with the
                                                   Lean-Agile Development Tools | 271



principles of Agile (continuous delivery).
       The principles of Lean (continuous improvement) are a good fit with the itera-
tive learning engineering process shown in Chapter 1, and the Agile principles align
well with learning engineering as human-centered design, explained in Chapter 3.


Lean-Agile in Learning Engineering
Burr Settles is one of the early employees of Duolingo, as the tenth engineer and the
twentieth overall employee. What’s more, Duolingo is his first and only corporate
job to date. And to top it off, Duolingo is a relatively young company, with its first
beta product out for testing November 30, 2011. By this time, companies had been
experimenting with Agile for over ten years, and Lean was twenty years old. So
when asked about project management at Duolingo, specifically experiences with
methods that preceded Agile, Burr said, “Oh, they never really tried that.” Duolingo
was operating Agile from the start. “In the beginning, if it couldn’t be done in two
weeks, we didn’t do it.”
      What does it mean to operate Agile? What’s important to understand about
Lean-Agile is that it represents a collection of principles meant to enable teams to
deliver maximum value to customers. Methods and practices aligned with those
principles are widely used today.


Scrum
Have you ever watched a rugby game? It’s beautiful to watch a self-organizing team
of fifteen individuals move the ball down the field to the goal, orchestrating together
and in the moment to respond to changing conditions. It’s from this game that Agile
Scrum found its name.
       Scrum is a framework that values honesty, openness, transparency, empower-
ment, and collaboration. In order to facilitate those values, Scrum includes specific
roles, activities, artifacts, and their specified rules. Because it creates a language for
roles and activities, it can feel daunting to a newcomer, even cult-like. In addition,
because of its structured roles and activities, for teams new to Scrum, the approach
can feel dogmatic and sometimes even contrary to the Agile principles themselves.
But if you keep in mind a self-organized team working together to move a ball down
the field, many of the activities begin to make sense. Everyone on the Scrum team
owns the success of the project.
272 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




     FIGURE 11.1. A rugby scrum Credit: Alain Vermeulen



     ROLES

     Product Owner: This role is responsible for maintaining a product backlog, which
     is simply a list of work to be done, in priority order. The work is described from the
     perspective of the user to whom the work will bring incremental value and focuses
     on what must be done rather than how to do it. These are called user stories. Each
     item in the list is ordered by priority by the product owner. The product owner is
     responsible for understanding the most important needs of the user and company
     and representing that to the team.

     Scrum Master: This role is a servant leader for the team. They help remove imped-
     iments and foster an environment for high-performing team dynamics, continuous
     flow, and relentless improvement.

     Development Team: The team members decide how to complete the work de-
     scribed on each item of the backlog and complete the work. A team is expected
     to represent the skill sets needed to drive the work to completion and deliver the
     incremental value. The team members decide who completes which tasks; this isn’t
     assigned by the Scrum master or product owner.


     ACTIVITIES

     Stand-up: A short daily meeting in which each team member describes work they
                                                 Lean-Agile Development Tools | 273



completed the day before, work they plan on completing the current day, and any
blockers or impediments they may have to completing the work.

Sprint: A regular increment in time (two weeks is typical, but other increments also
are used) during which the team completes work they committed to complete during
planning.

Sprint Planning: A meeting that occurs at the start of the sprint during which
the team examines capacity and pulls in work from the backlog and commits to its
completion by the end of the sprint.

Sprint Review: A meeting that occurs at the end of the sprint during which the
team presents all work completed during the sprint. This includes a demonstration
of the functional value delivered.

Grooming: A meeting held by the product owner during which the acceptance
criteria (for example, what does it mean for the work to be complete and satisfactory
to the user) for items in the backlog are discussed with the team and the team asks
questions, gets clarifications, and estimates a size for the backlog item.

Retrospective: Perhaps the most important meeting of them all, the retrospective
occurs at the end of the sprint. Everyone on the team reflects on what went well, what
didn’t go well, and what they will collectively change in the next sprint to improve.


The . . . “relay race” approach to product development . . . may conflict
with the goals of maximum speed and flexibility. Instead, a holistic or
“rugby” approach—where a team tries to go the distance as a unit,
passing the ball back and forth—may better serve today’s competitive
requirements.
                                        – Takeuchi and Nonaka, 1986 3



Kanban
Kanban is a Lean method used to support teams as they work to continuously
improve their processes. In its simplest form, Kanban helps the team analyze the
process they are using to deliver value for incremental change. To do this, teams
visualize the work as it is flowing through the team’s process so that problems in
274 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     workflow are more easily identified and can be remedied by the team.
            The primary tool of Kanban is a kanban board. A very simple kanban board
     might look like the figure below. On each sticky note is a work item to be completed,
     similar to the user story used in Scrum.
            All teams will have a fixed capacity for work in progress (the middle column).
     At some point, they simply can’t take in any more work without introducing waste
     such as additional wait time or poor quality with rework loops. Therefore, teams
     may choose to impose work-in-progress limits to specified columns in the kanban
     board, representing the maximum allowable items allowed in a column at any point
     in time. Under these conditions, items may only be pulled into the column for work
     if the team is not at the work-in-progress limit.


     Scaled Agile
     In larger companies or institutions, the coordination of multiple Agile teams can
     be daunting. Agile teams are designed to be driven by the team members, thereby
     challenging many long-held governance, budgeting, and release planning processes,



          TO DO                       IN PROGRESS                           DONE




     FIGURE 11.2. An example kanban board
                                                Lean-Agile Development Tools | 275



along with top-down decision-making. However, research indicates that Lean man-
agement and continuous delivery processes positively drive job satisfaction and
software delivery performance, both of which positively drive organizational per-
formance. Therefore, methods for collaboration among Agile teams are needed to
harness the power of Agile while addressing dependencies, milestones, suppliers,
and so on. One well-known method is SAFe (Scaled Agile Framework) Agile. This
framework provides for planning across Agile teams in program increments, which
typically represent several sprints of work. The website www.scaledagileframework.
com is a great reference for learning engineering teams navigating the terminology
and methods of Lean, Agile, and SAFe.


Application of Agile Tools and Processes
to Learning Engineering
You now may recognize the learning engineering process as one focused on continu-
ous improvement to provide maximum value to learners and those supporting them.
You may also recognize elements of Scrum and / or Kanban that can help facilitate
team collaboration and delivery of value by your team. It’s possible that members
of your learning engineering team are also members of other teams using Scrum
or Kanban, or that technical work your learning engineering team needs done must
flow through the Scrum processes. If your learning engineering team is operating
within the context of a medium-to-large organization, you could find that you are
expected to participate in SAFe activities for collaboration with other teams.
       Let’s think about the Learning Engineering process introduced in Chapter 1,
and how a team might choose to use Agile to navigate this process. First, the process
starts with a problem to be solved in a given context. Let’s start with a very simple
example of Kanban application to the learning engineering process. Let’s say we
have a problem to be solved in a given context, and we represent the work in the fol-
lowing user story. We create a user story for each of the problems the team will work
on. (See Figure 11.3, and also refer to Chapter 12, Human-Centered Design Tools,
for more information on user stories.)
276 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




                             AS A (TRAINER, EDUCATOR , LEARNER, OTHER)
       FIGURE 11.3.          WHO IS (CONTEXT),
         Simple user         I WANT (A GOAL)
         story outline
                             SO THAT (PROBLEM TO BE SOLVED).

                             ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA
                             1. MUST…
                             2. MUST…




     Kanban Tools for Learning Engineering
     A learning engineering kanban board might look something like Figure 11.4. You
     will see that the columns in the kanban board mirror the major steps in the learning
     engineering process. In this example board, at this moment, there are three user sto-
     ries in the backlog, one user story in each of the challenge and creation stages, four
     user stories in implementation, one story in investigation, two stories in review, and
     one that has been completed. Thus, this team is actively working on a total of nine
     learning engineering problems simultaneously. Each story that is done represents
     results or findings that will serve to inform the problem to be solved—the ultimate
     value of the learning engineering process. Therefore, this method also supports the
     measurement of value the team provides over time.
            As work is completed, stories are moved across the board. If the team has
     work-in-progress limits, then work can only be pulled into a subsequent step if there
     is capacity to do so, never exceeding a work-in-progress limit. As this board is used,
     steps in the process where the work slows down or builds up will become visible to
     the team, indicating the team might want to consider a process improvement they
     think will improve the flow.
            Regular retrospectives provide the avenue for sharing ideas about process im-
     provement, even for teams using the simple Kanban approach. Feedback from every
     team member should be gathered. A simple and common format is presented below.
            If a learning engineering team implements nothing else from the Lean-Agile
     methods, the combination of Kanban with retrospective is the one to implement.
                                                 Lean-Agile Development Tools | 277




BACKLOG   CHALLENGE     CREATION   IMPLEMENTATION     INVESTIGATION      IN REVIEW   DONE




 FIGURE 11.4. A learning engineering kanban board might look like this



   WHAT WENT WELL?                          WHAT DIDN’T GO WELL?




   WHAT DID WE LEARN?                        WHAT WILL WE DO
                                             DIFFERENTLY NEX T TIME?




 FIGURE 11.5. Regular retrospectives encourage continuous improvement


 Visualizing the work to be done, understanding work-in-progress limits, and con-
 ducting reviews of the board for process improvement will result in considerable
 benefit to the team.


 Getting Started with Lean-Agile
 Adopting new practices like Lean-Agile can feel overwhelming at first. In this
 chapter, we briefly introduced concepts, roles, and activities typically seen in
 organizations that use Lean-Agile methods. We have provided samples of tools that
 can be used for applying Kanban or Scrum methods to a learning engineering effort
278 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     based on our experience deploying these methods to learning engineering teams in
     multiple organizations. However, the best way to understand how these methods
     work is to try them and iterate with your team over time. This tends to work as long
     as the team focuses on continuous improvement and continuous deployment of value
     to customers and stakeholders.
            Duolingo no longer expects all meaningful work to be complete in two weeks.
     As the company grew beyond a software startup, they also matured to recognize that
     Scrum is not a one-size-fits-all approach. For example, Burr and his team have recently
     been working on a project to add a knowledge state modeling service underneath
     Duolingo’s flagship product. This is obviously a large learning engineering effort,
     one with many stakeholders. The overall effort is expected to span more than a two-
     week sprint for development and requires a healthy runway of research preceding the
     start of development. The cadence of Scrum is not appropriate for the early research
     stage but is appropriate for the development stage, and Burr and his teams have the
     freedom to use the methods that fit the stage and state of the project. But Burr never
     lost sight of the ultimate goal—to deliver value to his customers. In fact, when the
     research started in September, he made an oath to stop shaving until there was a live
     feature in the platform using the knowledge state service. And the teams delivered.
            He ended up shaving on March 31, several months ahead of expectation.



     Endnotes
     1 Cunningham, Ward. “Manifesto for Agile Software Development.” Agile Manifesto Website, 2001.
       https://agilemanifesto.org
     2 Womack, James P., Daniel T. Jones, and Daniel Roos. The Machine that Changed the World:
       The Story of Lean Production—Toyota’s Secret Weapon in the Global Car Wars that is Now
       Revolutionizing World Industry. Simon and Schuster, 2007.
     3 Takeuchi, Hirotaka and Ikujiro Nonaka. “The New New Product Development Game.” Harvard
       Business Review 64, no. 1 (1986): 137–146. (See page 137.)
CHAPTER 12


Human-Centered
Design Tools
by Sae Schatz, Khanh-Phuong Thai, Scotty D. Craig,
Jordan Richard Schoenherr, Jodi Lis, and Janet Kolodner



This chapter catalogs some human-centered design tools that build
on the concepts and processes introduced in Chapter 3, Learning
Engineering is Human-Centered.


The goal of human-centered design is to understand the interactions among people
and the other elements of a system and then apply theory, principles, and data to
support human well-being and overall system performance. The “system” we’re
talking about is the collective assembly of all the stakeholder groups, system
subcomponents, and interactions among them. In a school context, this could include
everything from its management climate, classroom layout, and teaching methods
to the EdTech user interface, subject matter being covered, and students’ personal
characteristics. Figure 12.1 shows a concept of the multilayered system in which
learners and learning experiences are embedded. Each of these different layers plays
a role in the ultimate success or failure of learning engineering solutions.1
       To design the most effective learning experiences, we need to use human-
centered design techniques that take into account our whole system—from the context
of use and learner characteristics down to their mouse clicks and data elements. And
we need to plan for human variability, limitations, and imperfections. As discussed
in Chapter 3, disciplines such as user-centered design,2 user-experience design,3
design thinking,4 human-systems integration,5 design justice,6 and participatory
design 7 provide useful tools for this. There are also unique applications of these
techniques for learning contexts, and they go by names such as learner-centered
design,8 learning-experience design,9 universal design for learning,10 and design-
based research.11 (Check out the endnotes for links to additional resources for these


DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-17
                                          Public
       Public Health                    Awareness                         Jobs
        Conditions                                                       Market
                   EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT
             Government            Technology               Societal
Economic                                                                       Education
              Initiatives         Advancements           Infrastructure
Pressures                                                                        Policy

                    ORGANIZATIONAL ENVIRONMENT
   Workload         Employee Development                Leadership Involvement
   Staffing         Resource Availability               Organizational Culture
   Processes        Employee Engagement                 Organizational Structure

 PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT         HUMAN-SYSTEM INTERFACES          SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

 Lighting                       Classroom Tools               Authority Gradients
 Noise                          IT Access                     Social Climate
 Temperature                    Internet Access               Psychological Climate
 Layout                         EdTech Options                Safety and Wellbeing
 Distractions                   User Interfaces               Available Mentors
 Accessibility                  Accessibility                 Peer Interactions


                       LEARNING EXPERIENCE CHARACTERISTICS

       Individual vs. Group      Competing Tasks                Modality
       Task Complexity           Learning Tactics               Time Pressure
       Subject Matter            Cognitive Requirements         Interactivity


                       INDIVIDUAL (LEARNER) CHARACTERISTICS

            Knowledge/Skills     Alertness/Fatigue       Sensory Abilities
            Experience           Motivation/Attitude     Cognitive Abilities
            Mental Models        Identity and Culture    Metacognition




             BEHAVIORS         PERFORMANCE          LEARNING EVENTS

FIGURE 12.1. Examples of interacting subcomponents in a system
                                                Human-Centered Design Tools | 281



disciplines.) The remainder of this chapter includes an introductory set of human-
centered tools that are generally applicable to most learning engineering solutions.


Stakeholder Analyses
Stakeholders are the humans—people or groups—affected by, or in some way in-
volved with, a system. They may include learners, teachers, educational staff, man-
agers, system administrators, learning engineering collaborators, and many others.
Also, different stakeholders may interact with a system at different times. For ex-
ample, curriculum developers may be active stakeholders early in a system’s life
cycle but then only periodically after the final product is released. So, who are your
stakeholders, and how will they interact with your learning experience?

       Identify who your stakeholders are for all life-cycle phases
       Identify how they’ll use, affect, or be affected by your system
       Elicit and document stakeholders’ expectations
       Understand the context of how and when they’ll interact with your system

      A common way to categorize stakeholders is with a stakeholder analysis
diagram. These come in various forms, but often look like Figure 12.2. To create a


            HIGH

                    HELP                        OUR
                    DESK                         DESIGN
                              ED                   TEAM               S
                                                                  NER
                                                              LEAR ★
       INFLUENCE




                              TECH
                              ADMINS




                                                                   TEACHER
                    VR LAB                    DEPT.                 AIDES
                     STAF F                    CHAIR
                                       R
                              REGISTRA                 SOF TWARE
                                                       SUPPLIER



              LOW                  INTEREST                               HIGH

FIGURE 12.2. Identify and map all of your stakeholders
282 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     stakeholder analysis, start by brainstorming about the possible stakeholders and then
     organize them into groups, such as based on their level of interest (or involvement)
     in the project as well as their ability to influence its success.


     STAKEHOLDER NEEDS ASSESSMENT AND ANALYSIS

     Once you’ve identified your stakeholders, the next step is to think about their
     attributes and needs—making sure all are understood, identifying any conflicts,
     and prioritizing them as necessary. It’s important to complete these assessments
     early, so that critical system requirements are well understood before starting
     development. Following a stakeholder needs assessment, you’ll also want to complete
     a corresponding needs analysis. The difference is that a needs assessment simply
     identifies your stakeholders’ needs while the analysis helps you get to the root cause
     of why those needs exist. (See Chapter 8 for root-cause analysis tools.)
            There are many ways to effectively perform stakeholder needs assessments and
     analyses. Pick the tools most appropriate for your situation. Qualitative methods
     focus on exploring personal observations, thoughts, or experiences. Some of these
     research approaches include:

            Stakeholder elicitation, such as interviews or focus groups
            Open-ended reactions or attitudinal surveys
            Behavioral or cognitive task analyses
            Field observation, ethnography, and participatory analyses
            Design-based research (although this can also be quantitative) 12
            Reviews of published case studies

            Quantitative methods use more objective approaches, typically involving
     statistics or computational methods of some kind. Some of these approaches include:

            Trend analyses
            Quantitative analyses of published studies, like meta-analyses
            Likert-style questionnaires with close-ended answer options
            Computational methods, like modeling and simulation
            Experimental and quasi-experimental studies

     Note, whenever you’re conducting research with stakeholders—even just simple
     interviews—make sure to consider research ethics. Refer to the ethical frameworks
     in Chapter 7 and the tools for making ethical decisions in Chapter 17.
                                                 Human-Centered Design Tools | 283



IDENTIFY LEARNER VARIATIONS

It’s important to understand the range of diversity within a population rather than just
designing to its middle or so-called “average.” Learning engineers need to uncover
typical variations as well as edge cases among both dominant and non-dominant
subgroups, particularly from the learner population. This allows for the creation
of designs that accommodate and can be adapted broadly. In addition to using the
research methods described above, consider some basic questions about each learner
subgroup, such as from the checklist below:
       Who are my learners, and what will they learn?
       What are my learners’ different interests related to what they’ll learn?
       Why would these learners want to learn the targeted skills and content?
       Given that, how might they become engaged in learning?
       What prior knowledge and experiences do they bring with them?
       What range of abilities do different learners possess?
       When and where will they learn?
       How do they engage in this environment?
       How do they see themselves in this environment? How do they identify?
       How might we design learning activities that connect to varying identities?
       How might we ensure learners’ equitable access and empowerment?


Participatory Design Techniques
As discussed in Chapter 3, participatory design techniques invite stakeholders
into the design process directly, not only to gain empathetic understanding of their
needs but to guide iterative development of the solution intended to meet those
needs. In other words, participatory design involves interacting with members of
the targeted learning populations and other stakeholders that support them within
the design process itself. For example, you may collaborate with instructors to
understand their teaching experiences, practical constraints, and knowledge about
their learners during the create stage of the learning engineering process. There are
many different ways to integrate stakeholders into the design process, and regardless
of the approaches selected, the goal is to actively engage representatives from each
stakeholder group in the process.
       Stakeholders can play many valuable roles. However, since most people lack a
background in human-centered design, you’ll likely need to use participatory design
284 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     methods to help coax stakeholders into explicitly articulating their tacit knowl-
     edge—or, as the saying goes, to help them make the invisible visible. There are
     numerous useful collaborative methods, including the three outlined here: design
     cards, card sorting, and affinity diagrams. In addition to the following tools, the tools
     for understanding the challenge in Chapter 8 can be used with participatory design.


     DESIGN CARDS

     Design cards are cards that each depict a single concept via text or imagery. Design
     cards can be used in various ways to guide collaborative idea generation and critique,
     prompt the team to consider the wider spectrum of key issues, or help participants
     sequence or prioritize concepts, such as for modeling of workflows or processes.
     And the value of design cards doesn’t end with the initial design phase. For instance,
     they can be used as cues to help stakeholders critique aspects of a design in support
     of development iterations. Using a set of learning sciences concept cards might help
     end users respond to various questions about the prototype design, such as “How
     well did we do in addressing this aspect of learning?”
            A set of cards typically covers a comprehensive topic, but beyond that,
     there’s much variation. A set may reference more generalizable concepts (such as
     instructional tactics) using text, or it might include personalized images created
     for a specific context. For example, in Chapter 3, Medic Mobile used custom-made
     cards to describe elements of a health system. Each card included a single, sketched
     concept, such as community members, health care workers, places, technology, and
     activities. By using the cards during participatory design workshops, stakeholders
     were better able to conceptualize the wider system, engage in detailed discussions
     about the health care workflow, and share stories from their own experiences.
            You can make your own design cards based on the principles in this book or
     your unique learning engineering context, or you can search online for pre-made
     cards suitable for your design challenge. For instance, Transcend, a nonprofit that
     works with K-12 schools, has developed a set of cards that helps educators identify
     the most relevant concepts from the learning sciences for a particular educational
     experience.13 Similarly, InGlobal Learning Design offers a set of design mindset
     cards with thought-provoking and playful prompts that teams can use to help stim-
     ulate collaboration and generate better ideas.14 Famed design firm IDEO also offers
     cards for co-designing schools, such as its equitable learning practices cards.15 (In
     addition to its cards, IDEO launched a nonprofit business for educators that offers a
     number of open-access tools. See www.designkit.org for details.)
                                                 Human-Centered Design Tools | 285



CARD SORTING

Card sorting is one specific use of cards. Simply put, in a card sorting activity,
stakeholders categorize the cards into conceptual piles. This technique is popular
for user interface and user experience (UI / UX) design, because it demonstrates
how end users mentally “lump and split” concepts. UI designers might use that
information to create menus for an app or a website’s navigation. Card sorting can
also be used for other kinds of classification or prioritization activities—anything
where grouping is important. When performing a card sort, simply create the cards
and then either define the groupings (closed sort) or let the end users create their own
(open sort).


AFFINITY DIAGRAMS

Similar to card sorting, affinity diagrams ask stakeholders to sort concepts into log-
ical groupings. Unlike typical card sorts, though, affinity diagrams begin with a
blank set of sticky notes, and they’re designed for groups of stakeholders to complete
collaboratively. Affinity diagrams are useful in situations where a team needs to
sort through a large number of concepts—particularly when some of those concepts
might still be unknown to the larger group. Consider using this technique to rapidly
uncover concepts and their relationships—for instance, if the team is approaching a
brand-new design project or has an incomplete picture of a complex context.
       To complete an affinity diagram, follow these steps: 16
       Ask participants to silently jot down concepts, one per sticky note
       Post the ideas for everyone to see, like on a real or digital white board
       Collectively sort the notes into conceptual categories
       Promote an existing card or create a new header card for each group
       Create superheaders if two or more groups have a strong relationship
       Redraw the concepts and categories as a finished document

Figure 12.3 shows a simplified example of what an affinity diagram might look like
if stakeholders were asked to identify and then sort data science knowledge and
skills into a set of learning objectives.
286 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




    FIGURE 12.3. Example of an affinity diagram with potential data science topics




     Personas
     As described in Chapter 3, personas are representations of key stakeholders. Typi-
     cally, a project will require several (say, three to twelve) personas to represent differ-
     ent stakeholder groups or meaningful variations within a single group.

           [A persona is] not a description of a real, single user or an average user.
           The persona represents patterns of users’ behavior, goals, and motives,
           compiled in a fictional description of a single individual. It also contains
           made-up personal details, in order to make the persona more “tangible
           and alive” for the development team.17

            Personas should be based on qualitative and quantitative demographic data;
     use what’s been learned about the learner population (or populations as well as
     other stakeholders) to guide your generation of real-world persona variations.18 It’s
     important that your sets of personas cover the major variations across those who will
     engage with the implementation of your design. Ideally, personas should help surface
     variations in each relevant group, including different goals, backgrounds, cultures,
     and cognitive and physical abilities consistent with the general demographics. As
     you work on your personas consider the following:
                                                   Human-Centered Design Tools | 287



       Name
       Personality and traits
       Culture and background
       Social context (such as peers, mentors, and family)
       Abilities and disabilities
       Prior knowledge and experiences
       Goals
       Motivations (likes)
       Frustrations (dislikes)
       Environment and other learning context factors
       Access to relevant tools or technologies


Scenarios, User Stories, and Use Cases
Narrative is a powerful tool in human-centered design. For example, learning engi-
neers can write scenarios about the personas they develop. These help highlight a
persona’s motivations, context, and other characteristics and tell the story about how
a representative learner can be expected to navigate the learning experience being
designed. Here’s a brief example:

      Daniel sat at his family’s shared computer and logged into his school’s
      learning management system. His sister played nearby, watching car-
      toons on the television, and Daniel had to work hard to pay attention . . .

      User stories have some similarities to scenarios, but the practice of writing
user stories grew out of software development and Agile management. (See
Chapter 11 for more information on Agile.) User stories are meant to be short (only
one or two sentences), informal, and easy to read, and they should describe how a
person interacts with the intended system. A development project may have dozens
or hundreds of these small user stories. The idea is that each should describe one
meaningful feature of the in-development solution, and the product team should
be able to accomplish the development of a user-story feature in one sprint. Bigger
features that can’t fit into a single user story are called epics, and related user stories
might be combined under a collective epic.
      There are several user story templates; the most common one is below:

     As a     (STAKEHOLDER)     I want to      (TASK)    so that    (DESIRED RESULT)
288 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     An example user story made in this template might be:

           As a teacher, I want to know which students didn’t complete their
           assignments by the deadline so that I can check in with them.

            Finally, use cases are more like recipes. Use cases are written descriptions of
     how different stakeholders are expected to engage with a system. A set of use cases
     should show the variety of ways stakeholders might interact with a system, their
     different reactions, and the various outputs that might ensue. Each use case typically
     includes the following: 19
            Actor: Who’s interacting with the system (which stakeholder or group)?
            System: What product or experience is the actor interacting with?
            Goals: What does the actor want to accomplish?
            Preconditions: What must be true before this use case would take place?
            Triggers: What event caused the use case to begin?
            Basic Flow (Success): How does an actor complete the path successfully?
            Alternative Flows: What different or unsuccessful paths exist?

     A brief (simplified) example is shown in Figure 12.4.

      USE CASE            Access Assignment In-Box

      ACTOR               Teacher

      SYSTEM              Learning Management System (LMS)

      GOALS               Identify students who have (or have not) submitted their assignments

      PRECONDITIONS       Assignment was released (opened) to students in the LMS

      TRIGGERS            Actor with admin privileges opens an active assignment
                          After releasing an assignment in the LMS, the teacher opens
                          the assignment in-box to see the class’s submission statuses.
      BASIC FLOW          If the assignment deadline has passed, then the teacher
                          collects the names of the late students and may follow up
                          with them through the LMS, email, or text messaging.

     FIGURE 12.4. Simplified use case example


     Human-Centered Requirements Definition
     In general, the tools and analyses discussed so far in this chapter inform the design
     of a learning engineering solution, but at some point, design activities need to
                                                 Human-Centered Design Tools | 289



mature into tangible development work. Defining system requirements supports
that process. Requirements are succinct, formal descriptions of what a system must
accomplish, how well it needs to function, and applicable constraints or limitations.
       A successful project is likely to have dozens, if not hundreds, of requirements
to inform its components’ functionality and performance expectations. But not all
requirements are the same. As you consider your goals and constraints, look for
requirements that fit each of these categories (and note the examples of each listed
after the requirement category in parentheses):

       Functional requirements: What a component does (“plays movie”)
       Nonfunctional requirements: Qualities of a system (“usability”)
       Project drivers: Reasons or goals for the project (“reduce attrition”)
       Project constraints: Restrictions on the process (“must be under $1M”)
       Project issues: Project management conditions (“iterative design”)

       Writing effective requirements—especially human-centric ones—is a critical
part of systems development. In fact, research shows that many failed projects are
caused, at least in part, by a failure to sufficiently consider human-centered require-
ments. For example, one large-scale study on technology-based development in the
United States found that only 34 percent of projects were successful, 15 percent
completely failed, and 51 percent were only partially successful. Projects most fre-
quently failed because of “(1) an inadequate understanding of the intended users and
the context of use, and (2) vague usability requirements, such as ‘the system must
be intuitive to use.’” 20 To avoid these traps, it’s important to know a lot about who
will interact with your system, where and how they’ll interact with it, and what they
really care about—and then to translate those design factors into effective system re-
quirements that articulate the corresponding concrete functions and qualities. Also,
make sure to consider concepts unique to a learning experience. For example, which
of the learning science concepts from Chapter 9 apply? What kinds of learner vari-
ability does your system need to support? Which tools for learner motivation (from
Chapter 15) should be included? And from Chapter 13, what data elements need to
be collected, and what instrumentation is necessary to support those requirements?
       There are plenty of existing requirements templates and spreadsheets avail-
able online. Some templates are very simple, like sticky notes on a kanban board
as shown in Figure 11.2; other projects require more details or formal management
processes. Find an approach that fits your needs or customize the example shown in
Figure 12.5, which is adapted from the Volere Requirements Template.21
290 | Learning Engineering Toolkit
                                                                                 RELATIVE
                                     REQUIREMENT                                  IMPORTANCE
                                     CATEGORY

        ID#: UNIQUE ID      Type:                                    Priority:


                       ONE SENTENCE DESCRIPTION OF THE REQUIREMENT


        Rationale: REQUIREMENT JUSTIFICATION
        Originator: STAKEHOLDER (OR GROUP) WHO RAISED THIS REQUIREMENT
        Criterion: A METRIC FOR THE REQUIREMENT FOR TESTABILITY
        Satisfaction: 1 2 3 4 5              Dissatisfaction: 1 2 3 4 5
        Conflicts: ANY CONFLICTING REQUIREMENTS
        Events: IDS OF RELEVANT USE-CASE EVENTS LINKED TO THIS REQUIREMENT

       History: CHANGE LOG INFO            Supporting Materials: LINK TO MORE INFO

DEGREE OF STAKEHOLDER HAPPINESS IF THE            DEGREE OF STAKEHOLDER UNHAPPINESS
REQUIREMENT IS SUCCESSFULLY IMPLEMENTED           IF THE REQUIREMENT ISN’T IMPLEMENTED
(1=MEH TO 5=EXTREMELY PLEASED)                    (1=MEH TO 5=EXTREMELY DISPLEASED)

     FIGURE 12.5. Example of a requirement template


     LOGIC MODELS AND CONJECTURE MAPPING

     A significant challenge in iteratively designing learning experiences is keeping track
     of the reasons for decisions made along the way—for instance, design choices made
     based on theoretical principles, forced by necessary trade-offs (such as from con-
     straints or competing priorities), or revised in response to new information uncov-
     ered through iterative testing. Two specialized techniques, logic models and conjec-
     ture maps, can help you keep track of decision-making over time.
            A logic model is a representation of the design team’s expectations about the
     connections between a system, its policy inputs (resources, strategies, activities),
     and its desired outcomes.

           In the most basic terms, logic models provide a kind of map for a pro-
           gram or initiative, helping clarify a program or policy’s destination, the
           pathways toward the destination, and markers along the way. . . . [A]
           logic model helps clarify both what the program, initiative, or policy
                                                          Human-Centered Design Tools | 291



         is and what it is not. This kind of clarification is helpful in building an
         evaluation design that can capture the program’s or policy’s influence
         and impact.22

   Figure 12.6 shows a simplified logic model structure. In practice, you’d fill in such
   a table with summaries derived from more detailed supporting tables, and you’d fill
   out each of those through a collaborative design activity. Logic models are useful
   throughout a learning engineering project—from initial planning through iterative
   testing, implementation, and evaluation. They’re best developed early (for instance,
   to clarify goals, make underlying beliefs explicit, identify logical assumptions and
   gaps, and build consensus) and then revisited periodically (for instance, to help clar-
   ify when and how to conduct evaluations or to refine components based on testing
   results).
          The US Department of Education’s Institute of Education Sciences has
   published an open-access toolkit for building logic models for learning-oriented
   projects. Its toolkit includes templates, examples, and even suggested agendas for
   participatory design workshops.23

Problem Statement:
  Resources       Strategies                          Short-term         Long-term
                                     Outputs                                               Impacts
   (Inputs)      and Activities                       Outcomes           Outcomes
What resources   What will the    What are the       What changes      What changes     What are the
are or could     activities,      initial products   are expected in   do you want      anticipated
reasonably be    events, and      of these           the short term?   to occur after   changes over
available?       such be?         activities?                          the initial      the long haul?
                                                                       outcomes?




Assumptions:

FIGURE 12.6. Sample components of an education-themed logic model 24

          Similar to logic models, conjecture maps help articulate the logical
   relationships between initial beliefs and desired outcomes, but in contrast to logic
   models, conjecture maps tend to be more detailed and focused. Conjecture mapping
   is used to document the relevant features of a learning experience (such as the
292 | Learning Engineering Toolkit


                                                   MEDIATING
     THEORY                  EMBODIMENT            PROCESSES              OUTCOMES
     Metacognitive             Explanation            Planful         Increased Knowledge
     practice, combined          Guides              Activities          of Metacognition
     with expert
     modeling and            Problem-Based
     coaching, will help        Scenario              Good
                                                   Explanations          Increased Self-
     learners develop
                                                                         Monitoring Skill
     metacognitive skills   EXPLANATION
                                                   Practice and
                             Problem-Based        Experimentation      Increased Reflective
                                Learning                                  Judgment Skill
                             Expert Modeling         Worked
                                of Thinking          Examples
                               (Talk Aloud)

                              Metacognitive       Self-Regulated
                               Prompting            Learning

                            ACTIVITY
                                                   Self-Reflection
                                                  and Assessment


     FIGURE 12.7. Example conjecture map




                               SHIFTS
     FIGURE 12.8.
                                FROM              FROM               FROM
     Example theory             Confused about    Doesn’t think      Thinks math is
     of change activity         fractional        they’re good at    boring and
     (step 3)                   numbers           math               frustrating
                                TO                TO                 TO
                                Does fractional   Believes they      Sees math
                                arithmetic        can do math if     problems as fun
                                reliably          they try           puzzles to solve
      CONCEPTS
        CONCEPT 1
        Activate prior              GOOD FIT           GOOD FIT
        knowledge


        CONCEPT 2
        Problem-based                  GOOD FIT     PARTIAL FIT       PARTIAL FIT
        learning


        CONCEPT 3
        Use gamification
        motivators                                 PARTIAL FIT           GOOD FIT
                                                   Human-Centered Design Tools | 293



materials, technologies, and environment) and explain how they’re predicted to work
together to produce the desired outcomes.25 The idea is to draw an explicit line from
a conjecture (or set of conjectures) derived from theories about how people learn, to
how the conjecture(s) will be embodied within a particular learning experience (such
as through specific instructional interventions or technologies), to the mediating
processes (in other words, how the embodied interventions are expected to effect
change), and finally to the desired outcomes. (See Figure 12.7.) Conjecture maps
can be used in conjunction with logic models or other requirements engineering
processes, but they’re also useful standalone tools, particularly when it comes to
testing, diagnosing, and refining the pedagogical (or andragogical or heutagogical)
components of a learning engineering solution.
       If you’re not sure which conjectures or mediating processes to include, then
it may be useful to complete a theory of change activity. A “theory of change”
is a description of why and how change—such as achieving learning outcomes or
fostering learner motivation—is desirable and achievable in a particular context.
The open-access IDEO Design Kit includes an activity template and worksheet,26
and it describes the activity process in five steps:
      1.   Write out each shift (like learning or motivation) you’re trying to create
      2.   Identify possible concepts or activities that may achieve those outcomes
      3.   Create a matrix of goals by concepts; mark those most likely to succeed
      4.   Narrow down your set of priorities
      5.   Document your final decisions

Figure 12.8 shows an example snapshot of step three in the process. Refer to the
IDEO Design Kit for additional details.


Prototyping
A prototype is a draft version of a design that allows for demonstration of its concepts.27
Prototypes can range from low-fidelity paper drawings to high-fidelity interactive
models that showcase features on a subset of content. Early in the design process, it’s
useful to create quick and inexpensive prototypes like hand-drawn sketches.28 Use
these to refine ideas, communicate with the rest of the learning engineering team,
and get feedback from stakeholders. As design and development work progresses, the
prototypes need to become gradually more realistic. Mid-fidelity prototypes might
include wireframes (user interface sketches done by hand or with a digital design
application,29 such as shown in Figure 12.9) and storyboards (sketches of the flow of
294 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     an experience over time). High-fidelity prototypes are typically functional—albeit
     pared down or incomplete. For example, an advanced software prototype might
     include a fully functional computer-based application with realistic user interactions
     that cover one learning module within a curriculum.30 The IDEO Design Kit offers
     worksheets and advice on how to prototype and iteratively evaluate your prototypes.
     It recommends you “find fast and scrappy ways to do your testing. This stage of the
     design process could take anything from a few days to a few weeks, depending on
     what you’re testing and how many rounds of prototyping you want to do.” 31




     FIGURE 12.9. Early prototypes can be quick, hand-drawn sketches



     End-User Test and Evaluation
     Each part of a learning engineering design can (and, resources permitting, should)
     be tested, but testing doesn’t need to be difficult or complex. Consider this advice
     from famed usability expert Jakob Nielsen. Although he’s remarking on usability
     assessments in particular, his advice broadly applies to user testing, in general: 32

           Some people think that . . . user tests should be reserved for the rare web
           design project with a huge budget and a lavish time schedule. Not true.
           Elaborate usability tests are a waste of resources. The best results come
           from testing no more than five users and running as many small tests as
           you can afford.
     Later, Nielsen adds a sardonic caveat:
                                                  Human-Centered Design Tools | 295



      The most striking truth . . . is that zero users give zero insights.

Testing each part of a learning engineering design
may include validating assumptions—about your
needs analyses, requirements, personas, scenarios
and use cases, learning design elements, and proto-            AVOID THE “LAST MILE ”
types—with people your design is intended to serve.             PROBLEM WHE RE YOU
Don’t reserve testing for finished products. As the               COLLECT DATA BUT
Math Readiness development process described in                DON’ T USE IT TO INFORM
Chapter 3 demonstrated, it’s important to test your             DECISIONS OR ACTIONS
design components early and often—even just the              (BEC AUSE OF LACK OF TIME ,
paper-based sketches.                                            EXPE RTISE , OR SO ON)
       When planning your testing activities, use
the following questions to help guide your measure-
ment approach:

       What features or functions are you testing?
       How precise (sensitive) do your measures need to be?
       Which stakeholder groups need to be included among participants?
       Have you identified an appropriately representative set of participants?
       How many people need to participate to generate sufficient data?
       What conditions (like the testing environment) might skew results?
       How closely does the testing context need to replicate the learning context?
       What assessment tools (like surveys or post-tests) do you need?
       Can you instrument the learning activity to collect relevant data?
       Are your assessment tools suitably valid and reliable?
       What ethical safeguards are needed? (See Chapters 7 and 17.)
       How will you analyze and use the resulting outcomes from the test?
       Have you left enough time to take action in response to the test results?

      The qualitative and quantitative research methods discussed earlier in this
chapter can be used for testing. Early in the design process, testing may involve
lightweight approaches, like reactions surveys and focus groups; however, more
mature prototypes and products will likely require stronger measures of their
performance. For training and education contexts, Donald Kirkpatrick’s four-
levels evaluation model is a handy way to conceptualize learning assessment.33
The model starts with easier to measure—but less reliable and potentially less
296 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     impactful—targets, and then it progresses to more difficult to measure—but likely
     more valuable—ones:
           1.   Reactions: What did learners think? Did they enjoy the experience?
           2.   Learning: What did they learn? (Usually a pre / post-test combination)
           3.   Behavior: Did the experience affect future behaviors, like job activities?
           4.   Results: Was there a noticeable impact, like a company’s performance?


     USABILITY TESTING

     Usability testing is one particular kind of end-user testing. It involves testing a prod-
     uct with representative end users to examine its human-system interface in order to
     identify problems in the design of the solution, uncover opportunities to improve or
     add features, and learn about the target population’s behavior and preferences.34
            Typically, usability testing involves a facilitator who asks participants to
     complete a series of tasks using the system. The facilitator (or their fellow team
     members) observes and records participants’ behaviors, in particular noting anoma-
     lies from expected actions. The facilitator may also encourage participants to use a
     “think aloud” protocol, where they’re asked to say whatever comes to mind while
     they’re interacting with the system, such as “I can’t find the menu option I’m look-
     ing for” or “that animation was cute.” The facilitator may also ask or answer ques-
     tions—although they must be careful to avoid inadvertently skewing the test results.
     Digital.gov from the US General Services Administration has open-access tips and
     training videos for conducting usability testing,35 and the usability.gov site offers
     additional methods, templates, and examples.36
            Usability testing is often combined with a reactions survey of some kind. One
     of the most frequently used is the System Usability Scale (SUS). It’s a “quick and
     dirty” questionnaire that collects end-user usability reactions about ease of use, sat-
     isfaction, and learnability.37 The SUS has ten questions, and participants rate each
     item on a scale from one to five. (See Figure 12.10.)
            Scoring the SUS takes some effort, because some of the questions are nega-
     tively worded while others are positively phrased.
           • For odd-numbered items, subtract one from the user response.
           • For even-numbered items, subtract the user responses from five.
           • Add up the converted numbers per person and multiply that total by 2.5.
     Multiplying the final score by 2.5 converts the range to 0–100 so that scores can be
     more easily understood. After calculating each participant’s individual score, you
                                                       Human-Centered Design Tools | 297



can use basic statistical methods to find group outcomes, like mean, median, and
standard deviation. In general, an overall (aggregate) SUS score for a system of 68
is considered above average, and scores above 80.3 are in the top 10 percent—those
are A-quality systems.38


SYSTEM USABILITY SCALE
           Score each item from 1 (Strongly Disagree) to 5 (Strongly Agree)

1. I think that I would like to use this system frequently.
2. I found the system unnecessarily complex.
3. I thought the system was easy to use.
4. I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use this system.
5. I found the various functions in this system were well integrated.
6. I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system.
7. I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly.
8. I found the system very cumbersome to use.
9. I felt very confident using the system.
10. I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system.

FIGURE 12.10. SUS questionnaire



Pulling It All Together
This chapter introduced a broad toolkit of human-centered design techniques—and
these only scratch the surface. But don’t get overwhelmed. Remember, the goal of
human-centered design is to understand the interactions among people and the other
elements of the system in order to optimize human well-being and overall perfor-
mance. Select the most relevant techniques that will help you achieve those goals.
No single technique is required, and it’s OK to adjust techniques to fit your needs
and project constraints. Just remember that witty advice from Jakob Nielsen: While
it’s smart to be lightweight and efficient with human-centered design and testing
activities, zero activities gives zero results. Integration of human-centered design is
core to achieving learning engineering goals.
298 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Endnotes
     1 Figure 12.1 is adapted from Hughes, Ronda, ed. Patient Safety and Quality: An Evidence-
       Based Handbook for Nurses. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, US
       Department of Health and Human Services, 2008. http://research.policyarchive.org/21365.pdf
     2 USER-CENTERED DESIGN RESOURCES
        • The Interaction Design Foundation provides various design resources on topics such as user
          research, usability, UX design, and design thinking. These resources include tutorials, videos,
          and bootcamps with advice from experienced designers.
          See: www.interaction-design.org
        • The US General Services Administration provides overviews and how-to guides for designing
          good user experiences with software. See: www.usability.gov
        • Conboy, Antony. “The User-Centered Design Process (UCD) - EXPLAINED FAST!!” Video,
          4:46. December 12, 2019. https://youtu.be/4xeK9L7WmMM

     3 USER-EXPERIENCE DESIGN RESOURCES
        • As described in the User-Centered Design Resources, see www.interaction-design.org
        • US General Services Administration. “User Experience Basics.” Usability.gov. Accessed
          January 8, 2022. www.usability.gov/what-and-why/user-experience.html
        • CareerFoundry. “What Is UX Design? - An Introduction (Full Guide).” Video, 8:23. March 4,
          2021. https://youtu.be/ziQEqGZB8GE

     4 DESIGN THINKING RESOURCES
        • As described in the User-Centered Design Resources, see www.interaction-design.org
        • IDEO U offers online courses and certificate programs in design thinking as well as other
          design-centric tools and processes. See: www.ideou.com
        • Liedtka, Jeanne. “Why Design Thinking Works: It Addresses the Biases and Behaviors that
          Hamper Innovation.” Harvard Business Review September–October (2018): 72–79.
          https://hbr.org/2018/09/why-design-thinking-works

     5 HUMAN-SYSTEMS INTEGRATION RESOURCES
        • Pew, Richard W. and Anne S. Mavor, eds. Human-System Integration in the System
          Development Process. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2007.
          https://doi.org/10.17226/11893
        • The US Department of Defense also offers courses in human-systems integration. Refer to the
          Defense Acquisition University’s listing of resources. See: www.dau.edu/tools/se-brainbook/
          Pages/Design%20Considerations/Human-Systems-Integration.aspx
        • The National Academies. “Human-Systems Integration.” Video, 23:04. 2018.
          https://vimeo.com/258880061

     6 DESIGN JUSTICE RESOURCES
        • The Design Justice Network offers resources and conducts events for those practicing the
          design justice principles. See: https://designjustice.org
        • Design Justice adopts an activist approach to design, focusing on traditionally underserved
          communities. It challenges the extent to which universal principles are valid in understanding
          the diverse needs of users. Sasha Costanza-Chock’s book provides a comprehensive review of
          theories and issues in design.
                                                             Human-Centered Design Tools | 299



           – Costanza-Chock, Sasha. Design Justice: Community-Led Practices to Build the Worlds
             We Need. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2020.
             https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/12255.001.0001

7   PARTICIPATORY DESIGN (ALSO CALLED CO-DESIGN) RESOURCES
    • For a list of readings on participatory design, See:
           – Lampe, Cliff. “Readings on Participatory Design.” Medium (2019). https://medium.
             com/@clifflampe/readings-on-participatory-design-e006ed21a91c
    • DiSalvo, Betsy, Carl DiSalvo, Elizabeth Bonsignore, and Jason Yip, eds. Participatory Design
      for Learning: Perspectives from Practice and Research. New York: Routledge, 2017.

8 LEARNER-CENTERED DESIGN RESOURCES
    • “Learner-Centered Design: The Secret of Creating Engaging eLearning Experiences.” SH!FT.
      Last modified 2014. www.shiftelearning.com/blog/bid/345394/4-steps-to-becoming-a-learner-
      centered-elearning-professional
    • Quintana, Chris, Namsoo Shin, Cathleen Norris, and Elliot Soloway. “Learner-Centered
      Design: Reflections on the Past and Directions for the Future.” In The Cambridge Handbook
      of the Learning Sciences, edited by R. Keith Sawyer, 119–134. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge
      University Press, 2014. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511816833.020

9   LEARNING-EXPERIENCE DESIGN RESOURCES
    • LXD.org is a community hub for learning experience designers. See: https://lxd.org
    • Gutierrez, Karla. “Learning Experience Design: An Overview and 11 of the Best Resources.”
      SH!FT. www.shiftelearning.com/blog/learning-experience-design-best-resources

10 UNIVERSAL DESIGN FOR LEARNING (UDL) RESOURCES
    • CAST (which once stood for Center for Applied Special Technology) is a nonprofit education
      research and development organization that created the Universal Design for Learning
      framework and UDL Guidelines. CAST provides tutorials and resources for inclusive and
      accessible design for learning. See: www.cast.org
    • Meyer, Anne, David H. Rose, and David Gordon. Universal Design for Learning: Theory and
      Practice. Wakefield, MA: CAST, 2014.
      http://castpublishing.org/books-media/udl-theory-and-practice

11 DESIGN-BASED RESEARCH
    • Barab, Sasha. “Design-Based Research: A Methodological Toolkit for Engineering Change.” In
      The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences, edited by R. Keith Sawyer, 153–170. 2nd
      ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014.
      https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139519526.011
    • Research–practice partnerships often use design-based implementation research to adapt, mix,
      and merge curricula and resources for use in particular venues. For more information on these
      practices, including other readings and case studies, see:
           – College of Education. “Research-Practice Partnerships and DBIR.” University of
             Washington. Accessed January 8, 2022. www.education.uw.edu/slmi/research-practice-
             partnerships-and-dbir
           – School of Education. “Design Based Implementation Research.” University of Colorado
             Boulder. Accessed January 8, 2022. www.colorado.edu/research/learn-dbir
300 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     12 Refer to the design-based research resources cited above:
        • Barab, “Design-Based Research,” 153–170.
        • Quintana, Shin, Norris, and Soloway. “Learner-Centered Design,” 119–134.
     13 “Transcend Store: Designing for Learning Resources.” Transcend. Accessed January 8, 2022.
        www.transcendeducation.org/store
     14 “Design Mindset CARDS.” InGlobal Learning Design. Accessed January 8, 2022.
        inglobal.org/design-mindset-cards
     15 “Tools for Change.” Co-Designing Schools Toolkit. Accessed January 8, 2022.
        www.codesigningschools.com/toolkit-appendix
     16 Balanced Scorecard Institute. “Basic Tools for Process Improvement, Module 4: Affinity
        Diagram.” In Handbook for Basic Process Improvement. https://balancedscorecard.org/bsc-
        basics/articles-videos/process-improvement-tools
     17 Blomkvist, Stefan. “The User as a Personality.” In Using Personas as a Tool for Design. Position
        paper for the course workshop “Theoretical Perspectives in Human-Computer Interaction” at
        IPLab, KTH. 2002. www.csc.kth.se/~tessy/Blomkvist.pdf

     18 PERSONAS RESOURCES
        • US General Services Administration. “Personas.” Usability.gov. Accessed January 8, 2022.
          www.usability.gov/how-to-and-tools/methods/personas.html
        • Chronister, Michelle. “Using Personas to Better Understand Customers: USA.gov Case Study.”
          Digital.gov. Last updated April 6, 2015. https://digital.gov/2015/04/06/using-personas-to-
          better-understand-customers-usa-gov-case-study
        • For examples of some personas see:
                – Daniel, Kendrick. “Personas 101.” Digital.gov. Last updated January 9, 2015.
                  https://digital.gov/2015/01/09/personas-101
     19 US General Services Administration. “Use Cases.” Usability.gov. Accessed January 8, 2022.
        www.usability.gov/how-to-and-tools/methods/use-cases.html
     20 Pew and Mavor, Human-System Integration in the System Development Process, 191.
     21 Robertson, Suzanne, and James Robertson. Volere Requirements Specification Template. 16th ed.
        London: Atlantic Systems Guild Limited, 2012.
     22 Shakman, Karen and Sheila M. Rodriguez. Logic Models for Program Design, Implementation,
        and Evaluation: Workshop Toolkit, 9. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Institute of
        Education Sciences, National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Regional
        Educational Laboratory Northeast & Islands, 2015. http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/edlabs
     23 Shakman and Rodriguez, Logic Models for Program Design, Implementation, and Evaluation.
     24 Shakman and Rodriguez, Logic Models for Program Design, Implementation, and Evaluation,
        B-1.

     25 CONJECTURE MAPPING RESOURCES
        • Sandoval, William. “Conjecture Mapping: An Approach to Systematic Educational Design
          Research.” Journal of the Learning Sciences 23, no. 1 (2014): 18–36.
          https://doi.org/10.1080/10508406.2013.778204
        • “Conjecture Map.” EduTechWiki. Last modified October 30, 2019. http://edutechwiki.unige.ch/
          en/Conjecture_map
                                                        Human-Centered Design Tools | 301



   • Lee, Victor R., Mimi Recker, and Abigail L. Phillips. “Conjecture Mapping the Library:
     Iterative Refinements Toward Supporting Maker Learning Activities in Small Community
     Spaces.” In Rethinking Learning in the Digital Age: Making the Learning Sciences Count, 13th
     International Conference of the Learning Sciences, London, June 23–27, 2018, edited by Judy
     Kay and Rosemary Luckin. www.isls.org/icls/2018/icls2018.com/index.html
26 Ideo.org. “Explore Your Theory of Change.” Design Kit. Accessed January 8, 2022. www.
   designkit.org/methods/explore-your-theory-of-change
27 Friis Dam, Rikke and Teo Yu Siang. “Design Thinking: Get Started with Prototyping.” Interaction
   Design Foundation. Last modified 2021. www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/design-
   thinking-get-started-with-prototyping
28 Rubin, Jonathan. “Design Sketching: The Easiest Prototype Method Ever.” Digital.gov. Last
   modified August 8, 2014.
   https://digital.gov/2014/08/08/design-sketching-the-easiest-prototype-method-ever
29 Kopp, Brandon. “Making Prototypes with Tools You Already Have.” Digital.gov. Last modified
   December 19, 2014.
   https://digital.gov/2014/12/19/making-prototypes-with-tools-you-already-have
30 US General Services Administration. “Prototyping.” Usability.gov. Accessed January 8, 2022.
   www.usability.gov/how-to-and-tools/methods/prototyping.html
31 Ideo.org. “Rapid Prototyping.” Design Kit. Accessed January 8, 2022.
   www.designkit.org/methods/rapid-prototyping
32 Nielsen, Jakob. “Why You Only Need to Test with 5 Users.” Nielsen Norman Group. Last
   modified March 18, 2000. www.nngroup.com/articles/why-you-only-need-to-test-with-5-users
33 Kirkpatrick, Donald L. and James D. Kirkpatrick. Evaluating Training Programs. 3rd ed. San
   Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 2006.
34 Moran, Kate. “Usability Testing 101.” Nielsen Norman Group. Last modified December 1, 2019.
   www.nngroup.com/articles/usability-testing-101
35 Digital.gov from the US General Services Administration has open-access tips and training videos
   for conducting usability testing. See: https://digital.gov/topics/usability-testing
36 Usability.gov offers additional methods, templates, and examples. See: www.usability.gov
37 US General Services Administration. “System Usability Scale (SUS).” Usability.gov. Accessed
   January 8, 2022. www.usability.gov/how-to-and-tools/methods/system-usability-scale.html
38 Sauro, Jeff. “Measuring Usability with the System Usability Scale (SUS).” MeasuringU. Last
   modified February 3, 2011. https://measuringu.com/sus
CHAPTER 13


Data Instrumentation Tools
by Erin Czerwinski, Jim Goodell, Steve Ritter,
Robert Sottilare, and Khanh-Phuong Thai



This chapter provides process tools for deciding what data to collect and
for designing instrumentation for the collection of those data. It supports
practical application of concepts introduced in Chapter 5, Learning
Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation. This chapter also
includes references to standards-based open-source software resources
for instrumenting learning experiences.


In Chapter 5 we examined the essential role of data collection in the learning engi-
neering process. Instrumentation design and implementation are integral for this.
During the creation phase we’re not only creating learning experiences and things
that impact the conditions for learning but also determining the data we’ll use to
inform iterative improvement of those products. This might mean designing and
developing new sensors or new data pipelines—new ways of capturing, processing,
and tagging collected data to help us answer questions. Other times, the necessary
data are already captured by a learning platform, and we just need to confirm that
they’re being analyzed and used in meaningful ways.


  START WITH THE QUESTION, “What do we want to learn from the data?”

       One approach to answering that question is to consider the first or next
implementation of our learning engineering creation as a research trial. Are we
testing one possible solution against the status quo? Or are we testing two or more
variations? We should have an idea about the desired outcome, that is, a theory
based on the learning sciences and / or a hypothesis based on what we know about
the specific challenge. This research trial will test our hypothesis or compare two or


DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-18
304 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     more options for meeting the challenge.
            The next question is, “What are the possible ways we can test that theory or
     outcome using data?” We don’t need perfect measures, only indicators. The most
     accurate way to measure a student outcome on a five-minute learning experience
     may be pre- and post-tests that take twenty minutes each. However, we don’t have
     that luxury in most cases—nor do we typically have laboratory-like conditions in
     which to finely control the testing. Often instrumentation and sensors need to be
     unobtrusive and suitable for ecological (real-world) conditions. Is there another way
     that we can capture enough data to test our creation(s) with little or no additional
     work for learners and teachers?
            We might ask, “Are sensors and a pipeline already in place?” Sometimes a
     learning platform or learning management system already logs learner interactions
     and outcomes. If not, we ask, “What resources do we have to create the needed sen-
     sor(s) and pipeline?” If the data collection mechanisms aren’t already in place and
     we don’t have the technical resources to develop new mechanisms from scratch, then
     there may be some open-source tools or creative approaches that could work. The
     following tools are designed to help in this process.


     Data Instrumentation Decision Tool
     Complete for each question that you want the data to answer:
        Question: What’s the question to answer? Who wants to know? Why?
        Method: How can we answer this question using data? What trial or research
         methods should be used? What analysis techniques? How can we measure
         unobtrusively?
        Metrics: What do we need to calculate from the data to answer the question?
        Data Elements: What data elements must be collected at what grain size for
         the metric and analysis?
        Sources: Are the sensor(s) and pipeline already in place to collect the needed
         elements? If not, what are our options for creating the instrumentation?
        Quality: What assumptions do we have about the quality of data from the
         existing sources? Can we check those assumptions, for example, with data
         profiling tools? Was the instrumentation intended for a different purpose?
         Does the quality hold up for the new purpose and metrics? Are there other
         aspects of quality that will impact its use for this new purpose?
                                                       Data Instrumentation Tools | 305



xAPI: Getting to the Data
As discussed in Chapter 5, Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation,
the Experience Application Programming Interface (xAPI) is an open-source data
standard that helps learning engineers instrument sensors to get interoperable,
granular, context-rich, and semantically linked data out of them. In practice, xAPI
includes three main parts: coded statements (like the one below) that are written into
your learning technology, a learning record store (a data store you implement) to
catch and validate the xAPI outputs, and xAPI Profiles that help us have consistency
in our data elements and terminology across different experiences and systems.


EXAMPLE X API STATEMENT IN JSON

{
“actor”: {
    “objectType”: “Agent”,
    “name”: “Ann Advisor”,
    “mbox_sha1sum”: “BF4479FD4A834CFC4033C40AB58F5DBBACC599BB”
  },
“verb”: {
    “id”: “https://w3id.org/xapi/dod-isd/verbs/advised”,
    “display”: {
              “fr”: “conseiller”,
              “en-US”: “advised”
      }
  },
“object”: {
    “objectType”: “Agent”,
    “name”: “A. Learner”
    “mbox”: “mailto:pojulgnatt@abcde.com”,
  },
“timestamp”: “2021-11-09T11:20:32.321−05:00”
}

FIGURE 13.1. An example xAPI statement for an event where “Ann Advisor”
(actor) “advised” (verb) “A. Learner” (object). See also the Yet Analytics xAPI
Statement Validator at http://yetanalytics.github.io/xapi-schema-demo
306 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     And the figure below shows an example web page instrumented with xAPI.


   1. <head>
   2.   <!-- Get reusable scripts that hide the complexity -->
   3.   <script type=“text/javascript” src=“./js/jimsxapiwrapper.js”></script>
   4.
   5.   <!-- Script sets variables, calls scripts to format, sends Statement -->
   6.   <script>
   7.   function send_statement(value){
   8.         var conf = {
   9.              “endpoint” : “https://lrs.adlnet.gov/xapi/”,
   10.              “auth” : “Basic ” + toBase64(“xapi-tools:xapi-tools”)
   11.              };
   12.         ADL.XAPIWrapper.changeConfig(conf);
   13.
   14.         // Set values and set up xAPI Statement in the right format
   15.         var actorName = “Your Name Here”; // Change to your name or alias
   16.         var actorMail = “mailto:Tester@example.com”;
   17.         var verbId = “http://example.com/xapi/interacted;
   18.         var verbDisplay = “interacted”;
   19.         var objectId = “http://example.com/button_example”,
   20.         var resultResponse = value; // “value” is name button clicked
   21.    // Call a function to construct the xAPI statement behind the scenes
   22.         var statement = GOODELL.XAPIWrapper.setupSimpleStatement();
   23.
   24.         // Dispatch the statement to the LRS
   25.         var result = ADL.XAPIWrapper.sendStatement(statement);
   26.    }
   27.    </script>
   28. </head>
   29.
   30. <body>
   31.    <!-- “name” is optional “response” + (actor) (interacted) (button) -->
   32. <p>Instrumentation is easy.</p>
   33.    <button type=“button” name=“True”
                         onclick=“send_statement(this.name)”>True</button>
   34.     <button type=“button” name=“False”
                         onclick=“send_statement(this.name)”>False</button>
   35. </body>
   36. </html>


     FIGURE 13.2. Adapted from Anthony Altieri’s 2017 Learning Solutions
     article. Example results at http://adlnet.github.io/xapi-statement-viewer.
     NOTES: This uses functions in lines 22 and 25 to call a separate script file (jimsxapiwrapper.js) loaded in line
     3 to minimize the code needed in the web page. This is a simplified example for illustration purposes. In real
     implementations the basic authentication used here would be replaced with more robust security protocols.
                                                     Data Instrumentation Tools | 307



Instrumentation in Commercial Platforms
USING DATA THAT ARE ALREADY COLLECTED BY AN
ONLINE PLATFORM TO ANSWER SOME QUESTIONS

Most learning management systems already collect information about the learning
activities a learner launches, times assignments are submitted, assignment scores,
and other basic interactions. These platforms also log information about usage of
the system and resources within the system. Those data may or may not include
the details needed to answer all of your learning engineering questions—but that
information may be able to answer some questions. Be careful when using data from
instrumentation designed for a different purpose; the data labels may suggest mean-
ing that wasn’t intended, like in the story in Chapter 5 where the use of “SUCCEED”
made sense to the software developers but the learning analytics team interpreted
it differently. In any case, it’s good to know what data are already available before
developing new instrumentation.


GOOGLE CLASSROOM CONNECTOR FOR K-12

The Google Classroom Connector, by InnovateEDU, is a free and open-source data
extraction tool for any school district that uses G Suite for Education. No external
software or application is needed. Using the connector, Google Classroom data
are loaded into Google BigQuery, a fully managed data warehouse within Google
Cloud. BigQuery allows you to analyze data using SQL, and it provides the option
to connect to popular business intelligence reporting tools such as Data Studio,
Tableau, Power BI, or Looker. This allows districts to create data dashboards or
reports using up-to-date Google Classroom data, for instance, to provide insights
into student engagement and performance.1


LEARNING MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS AND LEARNING PLATFORMS

Each commercial learning management system (LMS) has its own approach to
making internal data available in analytics tools or for visualization in the platform’s
own tools. Commercial vendors may have proprietary logging, use instrumentation
standards such as Caliper, xAPI, or a mix of the two. The scope of the data is
largely determined by the functions within the system. For example, some online
assessments may be automatically scored but the detailed data about a learner’s
308 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     interaction with a specific assessment item and metadata about that item may not be
     available. If your team is engineering or curating learning activities for delivery in
     a specific learning management platform, you can start by identifying the data that
     are already being and are available to you.


     WEB LOG ANALYTICS

     At a minimum, learner interactions with anything hosted on a website can be col-
     lected from web logs and analyzed using tools like Google Analytics. Web log files
     are automatically created by web servers. These logs record website hits, such as
     document or image views, and contains information about who visited a site, where
     they came from, and what they did on it. However, these logs probably don’t have
     enough detail to answer most learning engineering questions.



     ASSISTMENTS AND E-TRIALS
     Worcester Polytechnic Institute’s ASSISTments is a forever-free online platform for
     assigning and assessing math homework. ASSISTments was developed and proven
     effective under federal grants. The efficacy research was conducted in middle school
     mathematics, but the platform has been used at other grades, including higher educa-
     tion, and for other academic subjects. In 2017, MIT researchers called ASSISTments
     one of the two most promising technology-based interventions in the US K-12
     education system. In 2020, the What Works Clearinghouse funded a study to figure
     out what distance learning tools were effective, and ASSISTments was deemed to be
     one of three—out of the over nine hundred reviewed.2 ASSISTments is used by more
     than 20,000 teachers and their 500,000 students in addition to researchers studying
     pedagogy and learning.
            E-TRIALS (Ed Tech Research Infrastructure to Advance Learning Science)
     is a joint project between The ASSISTments Foundation and Worcester Polytechnic
     Institute that leverages ASSISTments to support researchers to create randomized
     controlled trials that strengthen the science of learning. New infrastructure, funded
     by Schmidt Futures, is being developed to reduce the cost and increase the volume
     of studies conducted using ASSISTments. While it was originally developed with a
     focus on learning sciences and educational research, E-TRIALS could be used for
     A/B testing and randomized controlled trials of EdTech products, online learning
     activities, or instructional content.
                                                    Data Instrumentation Tools | 309



X API LEARNING COHORT
The xAPI Learning Cohort is a free, vendor-neutral twelve-week project-based team
learning experience. Participants form teams based on shared interests and work
together on an xAPI project. xAPI Cohorts run twice a year in spring and fall with
weekly all-group web meetings. See xapicohort.com.


INSTRUMENTATION STANDARDS

Some commercial platforms may use standardized data formats and interfaces.
That’s a good thing! Standards make extracting data easier, so it’s worthwhile to
look for (or to build) systems that use interoperability standards, such as:
      •   xAPI (see the simple example in this chapter)
      •   OpenSimon tools (if a course is on the OpenSimon platform)
      •   Caliper (if a course is on an LMS using LTI and Caliper standards)
      •   Human Performance Markup Language (for fine-grained measures in
          certain training domains)
It’s best to look for systems that use published standards created by voluntary con-
sensus standards bodies, such as the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Learning Technology Standards Committee, the World Wide Web Consortium,
the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, or the International
Organization for Standardization. These organizations plan, develop, establish, and
coordinate standards using agreed-upon procedures, and importantly, they maintain
the standards through regular governance. They also adhere to principles such as
openness, balance of interest, and due process.3



UPGRADE
UpGrade is a free open-source, dashboard-based web service that facilitates design-
ing and deploying randomized A/B tests and fair comparisons of learning experi-
ences in educational software. The tool allows developers of educational software
and online learning experiences to define and run A/B tests to explore what works
best for supporting the most effective learning outcomes. Information, guides, and
source code are available at www.upgradeplatform.org.
310 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Endnotes
     1 InnovateEDU. “Google Classroom Connector.” Landing Zone. Accessed April 21, 2021.
       www.landingzone.org/google-connector
     2 Sahni, SD, JR Polanin, Q. Zhang, LE Michaelson, S. Caverly, ML Polese, and J. Yang. A What
       Works Clearinghouse Rapid Evidence Review of Distance Learning Programs (WWC 2021-
       005REV). Washington, DC: US Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences,
       National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, What Works Clearinghouse.
       https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED610886
     3 “Promoting Innovation, Competition, and Economic Growth: Principles for Effective Domestic
       and International Standards Development.” National Institute of Standards and Technology
       (NIST), US Department of Commerce, February 9, 2012. www.nist.gov/speech-testimony/
       promoting-innovation-competition-and-economic-growth-principles-effective-domestic
     4 Closing quotation from Park, Robert E., Wolfhart B. Goethert, and William A. Florac.
       Goal-Driven Software Measurement. A Guidebook. Pittsburgh: Software Engineering
       Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 1996. https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/asset_files/
       Handbook/1996_002_001_16436.pdf




                  In goal-driven measurement, the
               primary question is not “What metrics
               should I use?” but “What do I want to
                           know or learn?”

                      – Goal-Driven Software Measurement 4
CHAPTER 14


Software and Technology
Standards as Tools
by Jim Goodell, Andrew J. Hampton, Richard Tong, and Sae Schatz



This chapter gives a high-level map of current concepts from computer
science, computer engineering, and software engineering relevant to
learning engineering. It also covers technology and data standards used
by engineers for scalable interoperable learning solutions.


The most scalable and impactful learning engineering endeavors leverage software
engineering and computing technology. Examples featured in this book such as
Duolingo and edX have a global scale, only possible due to modern software and
telecommunications. Great advances in human-computer interface design, artificial
intelligence, distributed computing, and distributed identity are being applied to rev-
olutionize learning at scale.
       Learning engineering also addresses challenges that go beyond EdTech. For
example, learning engineering may be applied to re-engineer entire school systems
using principles such as modularization, human-centered design, and social systems
design. In these cases, solutions may focus on optimizing social structures, physical
spaces, and human-centric practices, but the process will likely use data analytics
and computer-aided design and may incorporate some technology elements in the
final solution. In other words, nearly all learning engineering challenges will involve
technology at some point, so it’s important for all members of a learning engineering
team to have a baseline level of understanding about these concepts.
       The following reference is intended mainly for those without a background
in computer science or software engineering. It’s intended to build awareness of the
technical tools available to support learning engineering solutions. This list reflects
a point in time and will need to be updated as new technologies and approaches
emerge.



DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-19
312 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Software Design and Development

     Software engineering is valuable for learning solutions at scale. Also, as covered in
     Chapter 4, engineers can create complex systems of systems through modulariza-
     tion (a LEGO-brick approach to software). It’s important to understand which soft-
     ware approaches that will enable—or block—long-term goals like modularization.


     Software designers define how applications will look and function. They might use
     diagrams, like those described by the Unified Modeling Language, to plan and com-
     municate how a system should work. However, although they’re usually experts in
     computer science, software designers don’t build the designs they create. Instead,
     software developers are responsible for turning those designs into reality using
     markup, scripting, and / or programming languages.
            Markup languages, such as hypertext markup language (HTML) and ex-
     tensible markup language (XML), are used to add metadata to a file. For example,
     HTML includes markup that specifies the placement of design elements on a web
     page, and XML is used to define structure (in other words, data about the data like
     naming the author of a web page) in data or documents. Markup languages are both
     human and machine readable. Because markup is used to annotate documents, it’s
     considered presentational rather than algorithmic, so implementing markup isn’t
     technically considered programming.
            Programming languages include rules, commands, and syntax, which are
     used to write machine-readable algorithms that a computer compiles or interprets.
     Most software applications are written using human-readable (albeit complex)
     language that’s then converted into machine-level or binary language (0s and 1s) for
     the computer. Popular programming languages include Java, C, C++ (“C plus plus”),
     and C# (“C sharp”).
            Scripting languages are a subset of programming languages. They’re
     typically used in online applications to send instructions to another program. A key
     characteristic of scripting languages is that they’re interpreted rather than compiled.
     That means a separate machine-readable file isn’t created before run time; instead,
     they’re processed line by line, just-in-time. This gives more flexibility but is often a
     bit slower and less robust. Popular scripting languages include Python, Ruby, PHP,
     SQL, and JavaScript (which sounds like it’s the same as Java but isn’t).1
            There are several different programming paradigms, which refer to the
     frameworks, patterns, and styles of software development. Two common paradigms
                               Software and Technology Standards as Tools | 313



       BUTTON OBJECT
- xsize
- ysize
- label_text                             !"#$%&'()
- interested_listeners
- xposition
                                      FIGURE 14.1. Example of a software object
- yposition
                                      for a button with properties and methods.
+ draw()                              Properties include horizontal and vertical size
+ press()                             (xsize, ysize), label_text, and position (xposition,
+ register_callback()                 yposition). Methods include functions to draw
+ unregister_callback()               the button and to respond to a button press.


are procedural and object-oriented programming. Procedural programming
specifies the sequence of steps to reach a desired state, and for that reason, it’s
sometimes called linear programming. Procedural programs also include procedures
(sometimes called functions or modules) that encapsulate certain steps into repeatable
recipes that are called by the code. In contrast, object-oriented programming uses
software objects that contain both data and coded functions. Basically, each object
is like a miniature program that includes a blueprint, and then you can create as
many instances of that blueprint as you’d like. For example, you might have an
object called “math_problem” that includes all of the typical properties (such as
instructions, problem, answer, and steps) and methods (such as displayProblem,
checkAnswer, and giveHint) of an algebra question. Then, rather than write code for
each math problem, you could just create new questions from your “math_problem”
class. Figure 14.1 demonstrates a basic software object with properties and methods.2
       If you’re not a software developer, then it’s probably not important for you
to understand the different programming paradigms; however, it’s useful to know
that they exist and that they influence design considerations, such as composability
(how different components can be assembled, like LEGO bricks) and extensibility
(the extent that software can be extended in the future, without too much difficulty).


OPEN-SOURCE SOFTWARE

Open-source software is released under a permissive license, so that the copy-
right holder grants others the right to see the uncompiled source code and often
includes rights to use, study, change, and distribute the software. The rights granted
under open-source software licenses vary. Open source doesn’t always mean free
314 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     and unlimited use, so check the license to be sure the rights you need are granted.
            Using good quality open-source software, like the OpenSimon Toolkit
     featured in Chapter 13, can give learning engineering teams a head start on their
     development projects because they can just customize the code rather than starting
     from scratch. Plus, many popular open-source products have been heavily resourced
     or significantly developed over time. For example, in the case of the OpenSimon
     Toolkit, it was developed with millions of dollars of funding and informed by over
     a decade of research.
            In some cases, open-source communities aren’t developing whole software
     packages but are instead creating the building blocks of future learning systems.
     For example, Experience Application Programming Interface (xAPI) standards,
     xAPI compliance test suites, and supporting technologies are offered as open source
     through IEEE Standards Association’s OPEN program and the US Government’s
     Advanced Distributed Learning (ADL) Initiative.3
            Open-source software may seem like a golden ticket, but while it does have a
     lot of benefits, it isn’t technically free. Or rather, as former Sun Microsystems chief
     executive Scott McNealy once quipped, “Open source is free like a puppy is free.” 4
     In other words, it requires care and feeding. In practice, that typically means par-
     ticipating in an established open-source community to help maintain the code, flag
     bugs, or recommend features. For brand-new open-source projects, it could mean
     building that community from the ground up.
            For learning engineering teams, it’s important to understand the opportunities
     and trade-offs of open-source software. At their best, however, healthy open-source
     communities can accelerate innovation and help learning engineering teams develop
     their own solutions more efficiently.


                                    SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURES
   DON’ T CONF USE OPEN
                                    A software architecture describes the pieces of a
    SOURCE WITH OPEN                software system (or system of systems), how each
      ARCH ITECT URE:               behaves, and how they interact. Just like there are
      OPE N SOURCE =                different programming paradigms, there are differ-
       COPYRIGHTS                   ent software architectures. It’s important to choose
                                    an architectural design that will support your desired
   OPE N ARC HIT ECT URE =          “-ilities” (or software quality attributes), such as com-
    MODULAR DESIGN                  posability and extensibility, mentioned above.
                                            Web-based architectures (such as for online
                                Software and Technology Standards as Tools | 315



learning) make use of web standards (such as HTML) and internet-connected
systems (such as web browsers and mobile devices). Modern web-based applications
are also built in modular ways, using data and interface standards that make it easier
to accommodate new content, software, and learning scenarios. Modular designs
that use publicly available software interface standards (versus one-off or proprietary
interface designs) let you add or remove software elements—like LEGO bricks.
These are called open systems architectures or modular open systems approach
(MOSA) architectures.


Modern software best practices recommend using modular, versus monolith, de-
signs. Modular architectures divide each major function into its own small code base
or microservice. In contrast, monolithic architectures tightly intertwine all of the
components, making it more difficult to change, remove, or add features. For learn-
ing engineers, the shift from monolithic to modular design can be seen in the evolu-
tion of learning management systems (LMSs). Functions that used to be built into a
single, monolithic LMS are being separated into plug-and-play software elements.
Modular architectures better support continuous innovation and prevent lock-in to
specific platforms, pedagogies, learning contexts, or vendors.


      Many web-based systems use a REST architectural style. REST stands for
REpresentational State Transfer. REST leverages the hypertext transfer protocol
(HTTP)—the standard communication protocol used by web browsers—to allow
systems to access and manipulate web resources through predefined rules. Learning
engineers might use RESTful web services for data storage and retrieval, translation,
search and discovery, data visualization, and so on. RESTful architectures support
modular web-based architectural designs, as recommended above. Also, the software
examples featured in this book use REST, as do many of the featured instrumentation
standards such as xAPI. (See Chapter 18.)


RESTful architectures leverage the World Wide Web infrastructure to send and
receive messages, including between different microservices or between a learner’s
local device and an app or a cloud-based web service.


      Modern web-based architectural best practices often call for the use of
linked data.5 As its name implies, linked data connects information from one system
316 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     to another using World Wide Web protocols. However, unlike typical hypertext-
     based websites, linked data also includes some specific requirements to make the
     connected data better suited for machine-processing, such as using controlled
     vocabularies expressed in standardized formats. (Controlled vocabularies are sets of
     authorized terms or phrases that limit and define what tags can be used.)
            Consider this example for how you might use linked data. Imagine you’re
     creating a competency-based learning outline for a postsecondary computer
     programming course. Rather than coming up with all of the competencies yourself—
     and then updating them each semester as technology evolves—you could connect to
     a linked open data set, like the US Department of Labor’s O*NET.6 This would allow
     you to reference predetermined tasks, skills, knowledge, and other characteristics
     for computer programmers. The overall framework, and each of the elements in it,
     is referenced using a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI). URIs are global identifiers
     that give unique names to everything on the web. Using linked data not only saves
     time; it also facilitates shared understanding. In our example, tagging the different
     modules of your course with the standardized O*NET competencies would make it
     easier to compare or integrate that curriculum with similar learning content.
            JSON-LD is a popular format for encoding linked data on the web. It’s based on
     the widely used JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) format, which is a low-overhead
     alternative to XML. JSON is an open standard for file and data interchange that uses
     human-readable text to store and transmit machine-readable data objects. It supports
     attribute-value pairs, arrays of data objects, and any other data that can be serialized
     into text strings. It’s commonly used to structure data for storage or transfer, for
     instance, between local and cloud components of distributed web applications. The
     LD in JSON-LD stands for Linked Data.7 In the O*NET example, you could have
     used JSON-LD to link the O*NET competencies into the metadata of your course.
     The instrumentation standard xAPI also uses JSON formatting, and xAPI Profiles
     use JSON-LD @context files to specify design patterns for instrumentation and to
     link to controlled vocabularies.


     It’s increasingly common for apps to use JSON-LD to leverage the power of linked
     data, and using linked data is a best practice for modern web-based architectures—
     particularly for data-heavy applications. So, whether or not you’re the “technology
     person” on your team, it’s important to understand these general concepts so you
     can look for opportunities to link or exchange messages externally.
                                Software and Technology Standards as Tools | 317



      Applications that produce a high volume of data continuously over a period
of time have additional architectural considerations. For example, an intelligent
tutoring system that incorporates clickstream monitoring might produce thousands
of messages per second.8 Traditional point-to-point architectures (where each data
packet is sent to each software service that might need to use it) will have too much lag
under the strain of all that streaming data. Instead, a streaming data architecture
is required.9 Streaming data architectures are specifically designed to handle high
volumes and velocities of data from multiple sources, and they allow you to process
those data immediately—which is useful for, let’s say, personalizing a learning
experience in response to observed clickstream behaviors.
      Streaming architectures aren’t the only solution to processing large-scale
learner data in real time (although they are the most robust solution). The more im-
portant point is that the amount of data, analysis / response time frame, and scale of
your learning system all affect architectural considerations. Take these factors into
account early in the design process to avoid issues with lag or scalability later.


DESIGN PATTERNS

Design patterns are established templates that improve the efficiency of software de-
velopment, the quality and maintainability of code, and allow for new team members
to quickly contribute to a project.


As introduced in Chapter 4 and shown in Chapter 9, design patterns are repeatable
solutions to commonly occurring engineering problems. Essentially, they’re
templates of established best practices that improve the efficiency of development
as well as the quality and maintainability of code. Design patterns also promote
shared understanding and a common language among teams. Software engineers
use design patterns so that everyone on a team can work together for consistent
coding approaches based on known architectural patterns.
       Design patterns can also apply to learning engineering. Most obviously, the
technology-focused portions of a design can use software design patterns to aid their
development processes. Beyond that, entire learning engineering teams can develop
design patterns that incorporate concepts from the learning sciences and human-
centered design disciplines in addition to the technological actions. Approaching
learning engineering challenges in this way helps integrate the engineering and
science components into more repeatable and scalable processes.
318 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Data and Data Architectures

     Data-driven decision-making is, by definition, part of learning engineering. Vari-
     ous database architectures and platform types address different kinds of learning
     engineering challenges.


     Data architectures address the structure of data and the capabilities of associated
     data platforms. Data platforms are the various components required to acquire,
     store, prepare, deliver, and manage your data (along with the requisite security).10
     Most data platforms include one or more databases, including relational databases
     (for example, built using SQL) and / or non-relational or NoSQL databases (such as
     object databases, graph databases, document stores, key / value stores, triple / quad
     stores, and hybrid platforms). The different database types each have strengths and
     weaknesses. For instance, SQL needs predefined schema and structured data, while
     NoSQL can handle dynamic schema and unstructured data. The different database
     types also scale and perform differently, depending on how they’re accessed
     and how data are structured within them.11 For example, object databases are a
     convenient choice for applications built using object query languages, and they can
     handle complex relationships between objects. Meanwhile, graph databases excel
     at managing highly connected data and complex queries where the relationships
     between data elements are as important to the data elements themselves.
            Structured data follows predetermined patterns, which make it easily search-
     able. For instance, a spreadsheet that includes students’ names, email addresses, and
     test scores in well-defined columns is an example of structured data. In contrast,
     unstructured data, including most audio and video files, has more variations and
     few (if any) predefined controls. Some types of data fall in between these two con-
     cepts, and those data sets are called semi-structured. For example, if you collected
     all of the emails sent by a class of students over a semester, that set of emails would
     have some internal structure (like to, from, date stamps, and other metadata), but
     most of the emails’ contents wouldn’t adhere to a formal pattern.
            Data lakes are repositories of raw data. They’re places to store all different
     kinds of data—structured, semi-structured, and unstructured—in a single place
     “as is.” They’re specifically designed to store, process, and secure large amounts
     of diverse data.12 The data from a data lake, or from other unstructured or semi-
     structured repositories, will need to be transformed before it can be effectively
     analyzed. This process is typically called data wrangling (or data munging), and it
                                Software and Technology Standards as Tools | 319



includes steps like discovery, structuring, cleaning, and validating the data.13
       Systems often employ multiple methods that transform data into other structures
for different purposes. Raw log data may be collected in a triplestore (a set of three
entities encoded as a subject–predicate–object statement), then those data may be
transformed and cleansed into another triplestore for analytical processing. Then,
facts from those data may be transformed into a normalized operational data store
for learner progress tracking and transformed once again to a denormalized data
warehouse (that is, a database where redundant data, like duplications in different
tables or version histories, are added back in) for enterprise analytics and reporting.
       Learning engineering teams will work with data—and often data at large
scales. These teams will need skilled data engineers to help design the data platforms
and pipelines to collect, transport, store, and transform the data. Teams will likely
also need data scientists who study sophisticated ways to extract meaningful insights
from large data sets, like through modeling and advanced algorithms. Or, instead
of full data scientists, teams with less complex analysis requirements may be able
to work with data analysts, who are typically skilled in data cleaning, statistical
analyses, and visualization tools.


DATA AND SOFTWARE INTEROPERABILITY STANDARDS

Standards are published documents that describe agreed-upon data or software fea-
tures like structure, definition, transmission, tagging, and use.14 By using standards
(versus proprietary or one-off designs), you increase the interoperability of your
data and systems, which will make it easier to scale your learning solutions. Data
and interface standards also support modularization, as discussed in the Software




                                  DATA DICTIONARY
                                      DATA MODEL
                                      PACKAGING
   FIGURE 14.2. Data
   interoperability stack              PROTOCOLS              LINKED
   CC-BY Jim Goodell                                            DATA
                                             API             SERVICES
320 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Architecture section above and in Chapter 4, Learning Engineering is Engineering.
     In other words, using data and interface standards can help learning engineering
     teams build learning ecosystems comprised of diverse learning technologies that
     “plug and play” with each together.
            Interoperability isn’t achieved by a single standard. It takes multiple layers
     of standards—often collected from different standards organizations—to achieve
     interoperability. Figure 14.2 shows layers in the data interoperability stack. At dif-
     ferent levels within this conceptual model you may need standards for the following:
        ► Data Vocabulary or Dictionary: Standards that define the meanings and
           allowed values for data elements.
        ► Data Model: Standards that define entity definitions and entity relationships.
        ► Data Serialization: Standards that identify concrete data structures and
           formats to support transport between systems. For example, a standard might
           define a specific schema or binding using a specific serialization protocol or
           format like JSON-LD.
        ► Data Protocols: Standards by which data may be exchanged. Protocols are
           generalizable procedures (or systems of rules) that enable data exchange.
           Examples include packaging protocols, such as JSON, and communications
           protocols, such as HTTP and REST.
        ► Application Programming Interfaces (APIs): APIs are the software
           interfaces that allow applications to communicate with each other and
           exchange data. Standard APIs are specified using standard protocols (like
           REST), and they identify the specific types of data that may be transmitted,
           what commands are used to send and receive data, and how data transfers are
           confirmed.
        ► Linked Data Services: Linked data takes many forms, such as competency
           framework repositories, distributed identity, and certificate authorities for
           credentials. Correspondingly, linked data services provide access to those
           data; for example, a service might provide a machine-readable competency
           definition or verification of someone’s encrypted distributed identity token.
           These services support interoperability and modular systems.


     DATA STANDARDS ORGANIZATIONS

     Although learning engineers won’t need to become experts in all of the relevant
     standards, learning engineering teams working on technology-heavy or large-scale
 • Caliper: Protocol for transmitting and collecting learning events for later analysis
 • CASE—Competencies & Academic Standards Exchange: Standard for competency frameworks
 • CEDS—Common Education Data Standards: Data dictionary and logical data model for education
 • cmi5—Integration of SCORM-like and xAPI capabilities
 • CLR—Comprehensive Learner Record: For secure and verifiable learning and employment records
 • CTDL—Credential Transparency Description Language: Rich description of credential resources
 • EDI—Electronic Data Interchange: Older transmission standard for student transcript data
 • LRMI—Learning Resource Metadata Initiative: Metadata for learning resources and their relationship
 • HyperText Transfer Protocol: Standard protocol for transmitting content and data on the internet
 • Ed-Fi APIs—Enable data exchange in K-12, such as assessment and demographic information
 • EPUB for Education: A profile of the EPUB standard for digital books targeted at education
 • IMS CC—IMS Common Cartridge: Content packaging standard for course materials
 • IMS CP—IMS Content Packaging: Format for packaging content and associated metadata
 • IMS QTI—IMS Question and Test Interoperability: Content packaging for assessment items and tests
 • JSON—JavaScript Object Notation: A lightweight text-based format for data interchange
 • LOM—Learning Object Metadata: Schema for metadata that describes learning objects and resources
 • LRMI—Learning Resource Metadata Initiative: Metadata for learning resources and their competencies
 • OBI—Open Badge Infrastructure: A format for communicating skills and achievements
 • OneRoster: Protocol and format for secure exchange of class roster information between applications
 • PESC—Postsecondary Electronic Standards Council: O!ers a set of educational standards
 • SCD—Sharable Competency Definition: Standard for competencies and frameworks
 • SCORM—Sharable Content Object Reference Model: A format for publishing digital resources for LMSs
 • SIF Data Model: Data model for representing and transmitting educational information
 • SIF Infrastructure: Protocol for transmitting educational information
 • VC: Verifiable Credentials (W3C)
 • xAPI—Experience API: A protocol for reporting learning activities and student experiences
 • XML—EXtensible Markup Language: Common format for representing digital content and data


FIGURE 14.3. Matrix of learning technology standards, organized by their
data categories and the layers they a!ect in the interoperability stack
322 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     efforts should seek out expert advice to ensure that a full and appropriate set of stan-
     dards is incorporated early in the design process. There are numerous standards or-
     ganizations that work diligently to define and maintain software, data, and all sorts
     of other industry standards. For the technologies most learning engineering teams
     will use, the following standards organizations offer many good choices:

           •   Access for Learning (a4l.org)
           •   Common Education Data Standards (ceds.ed.gov)
           •   Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (dublincore.org)
           •   HR Open Standards Association (hropenstandards.org)
           •   IEEE Learning Technology Standards Committee (sagroups.ieee.org/ltsc)
           •   Internet Engineering Task Force (ietf.org/standards)
           •   IMS Global (imsglobal.org)
           •   MedBiquitous (medbiq.org)
           •   PESC (pesc.org)
           •   World Wide Web Consortium (w3c.org)

     Additionally, there are de facto data standards, created and popularized by widely
     used systems such as from LearnLab.org, DataShop, and the Credential Engine.
     Also, regional initiatives, such as the European Blockchain Services Infrastructure
     (digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/ebsi), are influencing international stan-
     dards. Figure 14.3, derived from edmatrix.org, shows a sample of learning technol-
     ogy standards by interoperability layer and data domain.15 (This matrix was created
     by contributors to EdMatrix and coordinated by Brandt Redd.)


     Cloud Computing

     Cloud computing allows for more rapid and iterative development and deployment.
     Instances of prototypes, apps, or web services can be spun up in days (rather than
     months) on platforms that can be instantly provisioned. Cloud infrastructure is also
     scalable with redundancies that reduce the risk of any single point of failure.


     Cloud computing refers to interconnected servers (hardware / software resourc-
     es) that deliver services over the internet. Servers—whether the traditional kind or
     cloud computing—are the computers on which distributed software applications
     run. (Unless a piece of software runs entirely on an end user’s personal computer,
     then one or more servers need to be used.)
                                Software and Technology Standards as Tools | 323



       Cloud computing facilitates the on-demand availability of computer
resources. So, instead of buying an entire hardware server, which you might only
use for eight hours a day, you can acquire cloud-based resources as you need them.
Cloud environments scale to meet growing or shrinking needs. Commercial cloud
providers (such as Amazon Web Services, Google Cloud, or Microsoft Azure) also
offer many tools and features, like built-in analytics engines and cybersecurity. Such
services facilitate more rapid software development and implementation, and they
minimize risk. Cloud computing also better supports streaming data architectures,
which often require scalability and significant computing power.
       Due to its scalability, flexibility, security, and other benefits, cloud computing
is well suited to support technology-based learning. However, software designed for
cloud environments should use different components and architectural patterns than
applications built for legacy client-server (or client-only) architectures. Hence, it’s
important to make decisions about cloud environments early in the design process.
Similarly, for project planning, it’s useful to understand the associated cost model.
Rather than pay for a piece of hardware once, commercial cloud providers often use
usage-based pricing models. These tend to be much less expensive than traditional
(non-cloud) server options, but they grow more costly as demand increases. That
means it’s important to plan ahead for things like the number of concurrent end users
and scale of data being produced, analyzed, and stored.


Internet of Things

IoT is one of the emerging technologies supporting the modern distributed learning
ecosystem. These network-connected devices can serve as sensors that collect rele-
vant data as nodes in a distributed architecture. There’s a growing need for learning
engineers to develop software and systems that utilize IoT systems.


The internet of things (IoT) is a network of physical objects embedded with sensors,
software, and computing technologies for the purpose of connecting and exchanging
data over the internet. For example, instrumented medical tools (such as smart
infusion pumps, electronic medical mannequins, and environmental spatial sensors)
could be used to unobtrusively collect data about medical students’ performance
on a training scenario. (This data could then be streamed to a networked software
analysis application, likely on a cloud server, to be analyzed and acted upon, such as
by delivering real-time feedback.) There are countless potential uses for IoT systems
324 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     for learning engineers—from instrumenting communications devices to inform
     military team training to using them to enhance the experience of a children’s
     museum.16 It’s important for learning engineering team members to realize that
     learning technologies have moved beyond online platforms and client-side software
     apps. Increasingly, just-in-time learning is being facilitated by intelligent things like
     smart speakers with natural language processing and other technological devices
     distributed throughout learners’ environments.


     Human-Computer Interaction

     Good human-computer interaction is a critical requirement for effective learning
     technologies. This broad field affects all technology-enabled learning interactions,
     including their usability, data instrumentation, and personalized learning features.


     Human-computer interaction (HCI) is a transdisciplinary field addressing the
     interaction between humans and information technology.17 These interactions might
     include traditional interfaces, like mouse and keyboard, as well as newer ones, such
     as natural language (“Hey Alexa”), gestures and haptics (touch), and virtual and
     augmented reality (or collectively extended reality). HCI also involves user interface
     design, and it examines how different behaviors, norms, and structures form around
     human-system interactions. For instance, subfields and areas of study include:

           •   Social computing
           •   Affective computing
           •   One-to-one computing where every learner has their own device(s)
           •   Inference modeling (see Chapters 6 and 19)
           •   Neurophysiological sensors, such as electroencephalograms (EEGs) and
               other brain-computer interfaces, eye trackers, and heart-rate monitors

           As the list above implies, HCI also incorporates nontraditional interface
     methods. This is particularly applicable to learning engineering to help inform
     data-informed decisions. Instrumented learning experiences are a primary method
     used to collect data. Instrumentation involves hardware and software sensors
     and data pipelines that support the collection of learner experience data. Hardware
     sensors might include wearables and IoT devices. Software sensors may be built into
     learning platforms or online activities, such as within online simulations or game-
     based learning. These concepts are discussed in detail in Chapters 5 and 13.
                               Software and Technology Standards as Tools | 325



Federated and Distributed Identity

Decentralized identifiers enable verifiable, decentralized digital identity. This can
support self-sovereign learner records that give learners (and parents and guardians
of minor learners) greater levels of access and control over their own data, enabling
life-long learning free from institutional data silos.


All of the data—and diverse data sources—used for a learning engineering solution
create a problem: How do we know which data packages belong to which learners? A
single LMS might assign a unique User ID for each learner, but this quickly becomes
cumbersome when using multiple data streams from different sources. For example,
a single learning experience might easily include activities delivered from an LMS,
a separate simulation-based learning experience, a microlearning mobile application
for reinforcement during downtime, and a third-party testing application—and this
doesn’t even account for the various software and hardware sensors that might be
added.
       Federated and distributed identity methods store a person’s (or organization’s)
electronic identity across multiple distinct identity management systems. A special
type of federated identifier, the decentralized identifier (DID), has been designed
so that it may be decoupled from centralized registries, identity providers, and
certificate authorities. In other words, DIDs enable each person (or other entity) to
have a single, verifiable, machine readable User ID across systems.18
       In addition to supporting multiple apps within a single learning experience,
DIDs also help enable the integration of data across different learning experiences,
for instance, in the form of a learner-owned learning wallet or universal learner
record. Using DIDs helps learning engineering solutions become part of the larger
ecosystem of learning, creating opportunities for learners and fellow learning
engineering teams to build a data-driven network of life-long learning experiences.


Analytics

Learning analytics are central to learning engineering, both for decision-making
about the process as well as for software-based feedback loops.


Analytics, or the systematic computational analysis of data, is central to the
326 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     investigation phase of the learning engineering process introduced in Chapter 1.
     Learning analytics is the use of “data mining, machine learning, natural
     language processing, visualization, and human-computer interaction approaches
     among others to provide educators and learners with insights that might improve
     learning processes and teaching practice.” 19 Learning analytics capabilities may be
     integrated as standalone applications that are used after a learning event, such as in
     the Kaplan worked problems example in Chapter 6. They can also be integrated into
     real-time operations, for instance, built into cloud-based streaming architectures
     or incorporated directly into a software system, such as an adaptive engine in an
     intelligent tutor to provide just-in-time feedback to learners, as described in the
     Generalized Intelligent Framework for Tutoring example in Chapter 5.
            Learning analytics is a broad and growing discipline, and many of its techniques
     are discussed in more detail in Chapters 6 and 18, and the open-access Handbook of
     Learning Analytics provides a scholarly primer.20 For this chapter, it’s most important
     to understand that learning analytics don’t simply “happen.” In addition to making
     decisions about how to instrument, stream, and store learning data, appropriate
     algorithms are needed to process those data. Software considerations—such as the
     source or sources of data, data formats, software architectures, and the use of cloud
     computing—all influence which algorithms can be effectively used.


     Artificial Intelligence

     Some of the most impactful advances in learning technology involve AI and spe-
     cifically machine learning. For example, promising advances in deep knowledge
     tracing are allowing systems to make accurate inferences about learner mastery, and
     machine learning capabilities like natural language processing and computer vision
     are revolutionizing human-computer interfaces for learning.


     AI simulates facets of human intelligence in machines, such as problem solving or
     image recognition.21 Machine learning is one kind of AI. It gets computers to act
     without being explicitly programmed. Instead, it uses data to train an algorithm to
     recognize patterns. “In the past decade, machine learning has given us self-driving
     cars, practical speech recognition, effective web search, and a vastly improved
     understanding of the human genome.” 22 Duolingo uses machine learning and large
     data sets to train its spaced-repetition algorithm that predicts when learners should
     practice a word while language learning.
                                Software and Technology Standards as Tools | 327




                   ADAPTIVE INSTRUCTIONAL ENGINE
  PERCEPTS = SIMULATION
  CONDITIONS
                                ADAPTIVE ENGINE


        Policy                       V(x)                 Policy
     Improvement                                        Evaluation
                                                                         PERCEPTS =
         “actor”                                           “critic”          LEARNER
                                                                        ACTIONS AND
                                     CONTROL POLICY                       CONDITIONS


                     AGENT ACTS ON THE              AGENT ACTS ON
                     SYSTEM (ACTION, E.G.,        LEARNER (ACTION,
                     CHANGE DIFFICULTY)            E.G., FEEDBACK)
  AGENT                                                                        AGENT
  OBSERVES AND                                                           OBSERVE AND
  ASSESSES THE                                                              ASSESSES
  SYSTEM (STATE
                                     INTERFACE                         LEARNER (STATE
  AND REWARD)                                                            AND REWARD)


 CONTENT MODEL                                                  LEARNER MODEL
                                learner acts on the system
 INSTRUCTIONAL                                                        LEARNER
     SYSTEM               learner observes changes or
                          responses from the system




FIGURE 14.4. Model of an adaptive instructional system from the AIS Consortium


ADAPTIVE INSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEMS

Adaptive instructional systems (AISs) use AI and user modeling to determine what
to teach, when to teach it, and which methods of instruction to use. For example,
intelligent tutoring systems are one kind of AIS. 23
       Bob Sottilare, coauthor of Chapter 5, developed the Generalized Intelligent
Framework for Tutoring, and he leads the AIS Consortium.24 Other coauthors
developed AISs and authored the IEEE’s Standard for the Classification of Adaptive
Instructional Systems. That standard classifies components of AISs into four
328 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     categories: learner model, adaptive engine, content model, and interface. Figure
     14.4 shows a generalized model of an AIS with the category labels from the IEEE
     standard.25
           AISs, whether sophisticated intelligent tutors or relatively simple adaptive
     hypertext experiences, are essential tools for learning engineering teams. AISs
     allow learning engineers to scale personalized solutions, leading to significantly
     better outcomes than nonadaptive alternatives. At their best, AISs can replicate (or
     even outperform in a few cases) one-on-one human tutoring, but without the costs
     or physical limitations of that model.26
           Jim Goodell, this book’s lead author, chairs the IEEE AIS Interoperability
     Workgroup, developing standards that will enable more modular and interoperable
     AIS architectures—particularly at scale. Standards for AIS interoperability could
     drive innovation, increase the value of learning engineering teams’ R&D efforts,
     and promote economies of scale fueling more innovation. Jim proposes an approach
     that modularizes not only the system components but also the data processing func-
     tions within and between AISs, such as the learning analytics methods featured in
     Chapter 18. This framework uses plug-in algorithms and linked data concepts as
     part of a stack of standards. An early conceptual model of this plug-in architecture
     is shown in Figure 14.5.


     INTELLIGENCE AUGMENTATION

     Intelligence augmentation is the concept of humans and artificially intelligent
     software agents working together to perform some task. That task could be
     helping the human learn something or otherwise augmenting the human’s skills
     to accomplish tasks more effectively than either the person or AI agent could do
     on their own. It’s likely that more and more of the work that humans do will be
     augmented by intelligent software agents. Time spent learning versus time spent
     doing will increasingly overlap. People will learn while doing, and the lines will
     blur between task automation and learning engineering. There could be a growing
     role for learning engineering to create and optimize learning experiences within the
     context of learning while doing with intelligence augmentation playing the roles of
     teacher, coach, mentor, peer, and assistant.
                                   Software and Technology Standards as Tools | 329



                                 Standard API                            Standards for
                                 (Inference Exchange)
                                                                         Linked Metadata
                 STANDARD
                                            Knowledge Inference           SKILL DEFINITION
                    API
                                                                          ACTIVITY
Inferred                                                                  CONTEXT
Data Store                                                                DETECTOR
(Learner         INFERENCES
Model)                                                                    PERISHABILITY
                STORED HERE
                                 Behavioral Inference
                                                                         Linked Data Stores
                                   Addressable state model interface
                 STANDARD                                                (Knowledge Model)
                    API


Adaptive
Engine                            Inference
                    I/O             Engine         Detector


                 STANDARD                                                  Other Detector Algorithms
                    API
                    XAPI
                                                            Standards for
                                                            Linked Metadata
Event Data                                                    SKILL DEFINITION
Store               I/O                                       ACTIVITY
(LRS)                             10110101111
                                                              CONTEXT
                 STANDARD                                     PROFILE
                    API
                    XAPI
                                           Standard Detector Plug-in Types
                                           One or more algorithms that interpret observed
Sensors
                                           sensor data to predict, classify, infer
(Interfaces)
                                           relationships, or make other extrapolations
                                           EXAMPLE PLUG-IN ALGORITHMS
                                            • Latent knowledge inference
                                            • Misconception missed step inference
                                            • Forgetting curve
                                            • Latent behavior inference
               Various Sensors              • Metacognitive nudge impact predictor




 FIGURE 14.5. Modularized AIS Interoperability Framework
330 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Endnotes
     1 Upadhyay, Anu. “Difference Between Programming, Scripting, and Markup Languages.”
       Geeksforgeeks.org. Last modified January 6, 2020. www.geeksforgeeks.org/difference-between-
       programming-scripting-and-markup-languages
     2 Adapted from Pulkkinen, Esa. “UML Class Example.” Wikimedia. Last modified July 31, 2004.
       https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object-oriented_programming#/media/File:Oop-uml-class-
       example.png
     3 “IEEE SA OPEN.” IEEE. Accessed January 8, 2022. https://saopen.ieee.org
        Advanced Distributed Learning Initiative. ADL Initiative, US Department of Defense. Accessed
        January 8, 2022. https://adlnet.gov
     4 Donoghue, Andrew. “Open Source ‘is Free Like a Puppy is Free’, Says Sun Boss.” ZDNet. Last
       modified June 8, 2005. www.zdnet.com/article/open-source-is-free-like-a-puppy-is-free-says-
       sun-boss
     5 “What Are Linked Data and Linked Open Data?” Ontotext, 2021. www.ontotext.com/
       knowledgehub/fundamentals/linked-data-linked-open-data
     6 “O*NET Resource Center.” US Department of Labor. Last modified November 16, 2021.
       www.onetcenter.org
        Also refer to the O*NET Computer Programmers competency framework:
        www.onetonline.org/link/summary/15-1251.00
     7 “What is Linked Data?” W3C. 2015. www.w3.org/standards/semanticweb/data
     8 Rozestraten, Hugo. “Create Real-Time Clickstream Sessions and Run Analytics with Amazon
       Kinesis Data Analytics, AWS Glue, and Amazon Athena.” AWS Big Data Blog, February 17,
       2019. https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/big-data/create-real-time-clickstream-sessions-and-run-
       analytics-with-amazon-kinesis-data-analytics-aws-glue-and-amazon-athena
     9 Dunning, Ted, and Ellen Friedman. Streaming Architecture: New Designs Using Apache Kafka
       and MapR Streams. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2016.
     10 “What is a Data Platform?” MongoDB. 2021. www.mongodb.com/what-is-a-data-platform
     11 Keshari, Kislay. “Differences Between SQL & NoSQL Databases—MySQL & MongoDB
        Comparison.” Edureka, April 16, 2019.
        https://medium.com/edureka/sql-vs-nosql-db-5d9b69ace6ac
     12 “What is a Data Lake?” Google Cloud. https://cloud.google.com/learn/what-is-a-data-lake
     13 Stobierski, Tim. “Data Wrangling: What it is & Why it’s Important.” Harvard Business School
        Online, January 19, 2021. https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/data-wrangling
     14 “Data Standards.” US Government Federal Enterprise Data Resources. Accessed January 8, 2022.
        https://resources.data.gov/standards/concepts
     15 The contributors to EdMatrix advocate for open-stand.org principles, and the standards matrix in
        this chapter is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. It was
        originally developed by Brandt Redd with a lot of help from friends.
     16 Torrance, Megan. “Adventures in the xAPI: The Ann Arbor Hands-on Museum Project.” Learning
        Solutions, April 2, 2015. https://learningsolutionsmag.com/articles/1665/adventures-in-the-xapi-
        the-ann-arbor-hands-on-museum-project
                                     Software and Technology Standards as Tools | 331



17 “Human-Computer Interaction: Your Constantly-Updated Definition of Human-Computer
   Interaction and Collection of Topical Content and Literature.” Accessed January 8, 2022.
   Interaction Design Foundation.
   www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/human-computer-interaction
18 “Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) v1.0: Core Architecture, Data Model, and Representations.”
   W3C. Last modified August 3, 2021. www.w3.org/TR/did-core
19 Pechenizkiy, Mykola. Introduction to The Handbook of Learning Analytics. Society for Learning
   Analytics Research (SoLAR), edited by Charles Lang, George Siemens, Alyssa Wise, and Dragan
   Gašević, no page numbers, introduction page 9. 1st ed. SoLaR, 2017. https://solaresearch.org/wp-
   content/uploads/2017/05/hla17.pdf
20 Lang, Charles, George Siemens, Alyssa Wise, and Dragan Gašević, eds. The Handbook of
   Learning Analytics. Society for Learning Analytics Research (SoLAR). 1st ed. SoLaR, 2017.
   https://solaresearch.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/hla17.pdf
21 Manning, Christopher. “Artificial Intelligence Definitions.” Stanford University. Last modified
   September 2020. https://hai.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/2020-09/AI-Definitions-HAI.pdf
22 Ng, Andrew. “Machine Learning.” Coursera. www.coursera.org/learn/machine-learning
23 Brusilovsky, Peter, and Christoph Peylo. “Adaptive and Intelligent Web-based Educational
   Systems.” International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 13 (2003), 156–169.
   Schatz, Sae, Cynthia Oakes, Jeremiah T. Folsom-Kovarik, and Rhianon Dolletski-Lazar. “ITS+
   SBT: A Review of Operational Situated Tutors.” Military Psychology 24, no. 2 (2012): 166–193.
24 Sottilare, Robert. “Adaptive Instructional Systems Consortium.” AIS Consortium. Accessed
   January 8, 2022. https://aisconsortium.com
25 Sottilare, Robert. “Innovative Adaptive Instructional Solutions” Video, 55:17. AIS Consortium.
   https://youtu.be/7D-89ybPHUI
26 Fletcher, J.D. and James A. Kulik. Effectiveness of Intelligent Tutoring Systems: A Meta-
   Analytic Review. IDA Research Notes, 2017. www.ida.org/-/media/feature/publications/w/we/
   welch-award-2017---effectiveness-of-intelligent-tutoring-systems-a-meta-analytic-review/1-
   effectivenessits.ashx
CHAPTER 15


Tools for Learner
Motivation
by Laura Casey, Diana Delgado, Jim Goodell, and Prasad Ram



This chapter discusses learner motivation, one of the most important—
yet often overlooked—elements to successful learning. A tool later in the
chapter o!ers categories of motivational variables and suggestions for
motivating operations.


Chapter 1 presented the learning engineering process, which starts with understand-
ing the challenge. This includes recognizing that learners and teams are contextually
situated and also that learning challenges often involve motivation. Learner motiva-
tion impacts engagement and may be heavily influenced by the context and culture
of the learning environment. This is highly personal. Each learner is motivated by
different things at different times. In examining motivational variables, it’s useful to
understand how they impact learners differently and in different types of activities.
       Learning requires effort and engagement from learners, and behavioral sci-
ence gives insights into the core drives that motivate productive (or nonproductive)
behaviors. Generally defined, a motivating event is one that momentarily alters the
value of a motivational variable by making it more or less desirable. Consequently,
and by virtue of this value-altering effect, the behavior associated with that re-
inforcer will be directly affected; that is, it will be more or less likely to occur.1
Motivating operations can also affect motivational variables beyond a single
learning activity; for example, a particular motivational strategy may help learners
developing more productive attitudes, long term.


MOTIVATING OPERATIONS are deliberate actions to adjust features of a learn-
ing environment or a learning experience in ways that lead to productive learning
behaviors. These include learner-initiated and externally initiated actions.


DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-20
334 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



            Motivating operations can be taken by any person or automated system, and
     these operations can apply to any kind of motivating variable. Learning engineering
     teams apply a variety of motivating operations to adjust motivational variables to
     increase the probability learners will engage in learning activities and in productive
     learning behaviors that increase the probability of productive learning.
             Chapter 2 examined the Knowledge-Learning-Instruction Framework (KLI)
     having external instructional events and assessment events that may lead to internal
     learning events. We can add to that model “motivational events.” In the field of
     psychology, motivation has been understood as being either intrinsic (for example,
     natural curiosity) or extrinsic (for example, obtaining a good grade) depending on
     whether the source of motivation is internal or external; however, we purposely avoid
     this distinction. Attempting to classify motivating variables as intrinsic or extrinsic
     may not only lead us to a historically unresolved debate but also seems theoretical
     and pragmatically unnecessary. Instead, we suggest an action-oriented focus.
            Use the table in Figure 15.1 to consider strategies for learner motivation. For
     each motivational category, what variables and corresponding motivational opera-
     tions might be useful? The example given is for the category of “autonomy.” In it,
     we want to activate the motivational variable “choice” with the motivating opera-
     tion of allowing learners to “select the topic of a problem-based learning activity.”
     Multiple motivating operations may be employed within a single category, and you’ll
     probably need several techniques to account for different learners’ personalities and
     circumstances. As you plan your motivating operations, also think about how you’ll
     implement them. For example, when will you deliver them (the timing), and how will
     you verify that they’ve successfully tapped into learners’ core drives?
            Each of the categories in the table is briefly summarized below:
        ► Autonomy: Learners motivated by autonomy value independence or freedom.
           For example, they’re more likely to be engaged when given the ability to
           choose the path, pace, or features of their own learning.
        ► Competence: Learners motivated by competence value what they know and
           can do. They find satisfaction in academic achievements. This intrinsic factor
           might be activated by making learners’ progress more visible to them.
        ► Value: Learners can be motivated by something they perceive as valuable and
           that they’d like to have. It might be social value (belonging, being recognized
           as a significant member of a community, or being appreciated by others for
           who they are). Or value could mean earning tangible rewards that lead to a
           sense of ownership and possession. This can be activated by some forms of
                                                  Tools for Learner Motivation | 335



MOTIVATING OPERATIONS (STRATEGY) WORKSHEET

   CATEGORY                   VARIABLE               MOTIVATING OPERATION
 Autonomy           For example:                  For example:
                    CHOICE                        LET LEARNERS SELECT
                                                  THE TOPIC FOR A
                                                  PROBLEM-BASED
                                                  LEARNING ACTIVITY



 Competence




 Value




 Meaning and
 Purpose




 Avoidance




 Unpredictability




 Scarcity




FIGURE 15.1. Tool for considering motivational approaches
336 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



           social learning as well as some of the more stereotypical game mechanics such
           as points and leaderboards.
        ► Meaning / Purpose: Learners are motivated by a sense of meaning—a
           purpose or higher calling. They’re motivated to work hard when the results of
           that work make a difference. They find satisfaction in helping others and being
           recognized as a value to others. This can be activated through project-based
           learning, especially in projects that contribute to a local or global cause.
        ► Avoidance: Learners motivated by avoidance will work hard to prevent losing
           something they’ve earned. For example, Duolingo uses streaks, which are the
           number of days in a row you’ve completed a lesson. Each day that you complete
           a lesson your streak increases. As the streak grows the sense of loss in missing
           a day also grows. This can be a powerful motivator for some learners.
        ► Unpredictability: Learners are motivated by unpredictability that makes
           learning experiences more interesting or gives them unexpected rewards. For
           example, hidden messages, images, or features in electronic media, commonly
           know as Easter eggs, can be embedded in a lesson or activity.
        ► Scarcity: Learners are motivated to have or experience things that not
           everyone can readily possess or experience. The rarer the possession, the
           greater its perceived value. For example, schools with dress codes might
           motivate students by offering a rare “dress down day” when some students get
           to wear sweat pants instead of the formal uniform.


     Motivation Across Levels of Life-Long Learning
     Chapter 4 presented engineering control theory principles, open-loop, and closed-
     loop systems, and how these principles apply to adaptive systems of feedback to
     learners. These same principles apply to motivational feedback. Just as there are
     multiple levels of feedback for instruction (as shown in Figure 15.2), motivational
     feedback (motivating operations) may also occur at these multiple levels.
            Motivating operations can have an immediate effect upon a particular form of
     behavior or can exert an influence over more complex classes of behavior that ex-
     tend over longer periods of time. Providing feedback, enthusiastic praise, or access
     to preferred items or activities are often used as immediate, short-term motivators.
     Over time, these short-term motivators can also increase the likelihood of engaging
     in activities over larger units of time; for example, a student who receives appropri-
     ate praise and descriptive feedback may feel better about going to school, attending
                                                       Tools for Learner Motivation | 337



                                   ER TRAJECT
                            E CARE                OR
                        TUR                          IES
                      FU      EN T C AR E ER T R AJE
                          URR                       CT
                         C         NT IAL  LE          OR
                              EDE             VEL        Y
                            CR
                                     N  LE VEL
                                SSO
                              LE
                                    TIVITY LE
                                 AC            V




                                                   EL
                                                                        LIFE-LONG
                                                                  LEARNING LOOPS

                                                        R
                                               LEARNE



FIGURE 15.2. Motivational operations can occur and
influence multiple time frames of learner motivation



a class, participating in a daily activity, reading a book, or working on a long-term
project. Longer-term motivators include dashboards and maps that let learners visu-
alize their progress toward learning goals, credentials, and career goals. (An exam-
ple of this is show in Figure 15.3 from Gooru Navigator.) Learners are also motivated
when they can see that goals are attainable. They may be motivated by some level of
autonomy over their paths or by a sense of ownership, knowing that their learning
path is customized for them.


Data-Driven Motivating Operations
Chapters 5 and 6 examined how data from instrumented learning activities may
be used to predict when a learner is bored, frustrated, or engaged in nonproductive
behaviors. Similarly, learning analytics may be used to predict which motivating
operations will be most effective for which learners in which contexts.
      Predicting the impact of motivational operations is challenging because
the effect of motivational variables (also known as reinforcers) changes based on
338 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




                                        FIGURE 15.3. Gooru Navigator provides
                                        GPS-like guidance to learners. This
                                        may motivate some learners who want
                                        to visualize their competence or have a
                                        sense of autonomy over their learning.




     learners’ context. For example, points earned in a game are more likely to maintain
     an individual’s behavior of playing the game, if the desired goal is within reach, such
     as beating a competitor or leveling up. Similarly, the value of obtaining good grades
     may fluctuate over time depending on motivating and demotivating factors and
     may be influenced by personal values. A particular learner who frequently receives
     good grades independently of their effort, may be less motivated to work hard on
     an assignment, while another student may put in a full effort, whether based on an
     intrinsic work ethic or in fear of a decrease in grade point average. Therefore data-
     driven decisions about the application of motivational operations should attempt to
     factor in contextual and learner data. In the same way that knowledge inference
     models use prior learner performance data, motivational variable predictors could
     use data from prior observations of levels of engagement and behaviors that occurred
     with variations of motivational variables. (See Chapter 18 for more details on such
     analyses.)


     LEARNER IDENTITY

     Motivation is one aspect of a learner’s identity. We need to understand a learner
     against a learning space structured as a progression of competencies. This covers all
     aspects of learning—cognitive and behavioral, both covert and overt. Competency
     frameworks need to be extremely thorough, and they should be linked to diverse
                                                       Tools for Learner Motivation | 339




  NETWORK                   COLLABORATORS    LEARNING REGISTRY           LEARNERS

 MALINDA FAIRLEY
 Learner Identity
                                            MINDSETS



         KNOWLEDGE                                               CITIZENSHIP




          MUSIC     DANCE    FRENCH




        BIOGRAPHICAL                                             BEHAVIORS
         United High School
         Maine, USA
         Plays Guitar
         Competitive Dance Team             CONTENT
         International Baccalaureate
         Languages: EN, FR




FIGURE 15.4. A model of learner identity may be captured as data structured as a
progression of competencies covering all aspects of learning—cognitive and behavioral,
both covert and overt

learning activities ranging from off-line tasks such as projects, essays, and proofs
to digital activities such as videos and simulations. Learner mastery by competency
should be detailed across all elements of learning, depth-of-knowledge, and decay
functions (to represent the time to refresh the learner on the competency), and com-
petencies should be mapped to local norms such as state standards and courses.
       A very coarse representation of learner identity has limited use; for example,
3.5 GPA, B+, or 78% doesn’t provide adequate information about learners to support
them. Learner identity must be established for each of the competencies across the
entire learning space (sparse matrix). Learner identity for each competency can
be grouped into dimensions, and each dimension can have many attributes. For
instance, a learning identity may include the dimensions below:

   ► Vitals: This includes biographical data and summary data across all other
      elements to provide a quick understanding of the learner.
340 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



        ► Knowledge: This spans across a variety of subjects and courses during the
           lifetime of the learner. Skills are captured as part of knowledge as a “depth of
           knowledge” level encoding.
        ► Mindsets: Factors such as grit, perseverance, self-confidence, and motivation
           have been discussed. There’s often an emphasis on a growth mindset.
        ► Motivational Operation: This is an event or detail that increases or decreases
           a learner’s motivation to work often based on satisfaction, deprivation, or
           consequence of an action or no action from past learning experiences.
        ► Behavior: This is an overt, measurable response to an antecedent that’s
           maintained over time by the consequence that follows. Measurable aspects of
           overt behavior include the latency in responding or acting to an instructional
           cue or antecedent, time spent engaged in the given task, and percentage of
           correct and incorrect responses on items attempted. Predicting future behavior
           is often best done by an analysis of the antecedent, the modus operandi, and
           the consequences that followed. Specifically, did the consequences result
           in the learner gaining access to his or her desired function (teacher, peer,
           artificial intelligence attention; access to a tangible such as a tablet, game,
           recess, candy, music, or tokens; escape from the task at hand for a brief period
           or longer, such as asking for a break or time away, or a sensory response).
        ► Other dimensions and attributes: These can include higher-order thinking,
           context, and so on.


     Role of Motivation in Gamification
     In recent years more and more education and training contexts are integrating
     game-like activities into instructional routines, 2 and studies in game-based learning
     have shown that it increases learning performance. Game mechanics, or rules of
     interaction, can be introduced into any learning context without making the activity
     a game.
           Some of the reasons learners engage with and enjoy gamification are that it can
     provide feedback on performance, fulfill learners’ needs for recognition, and promote
     goal setting. In a nutshell, putting learning activities into a game format allows for
     the design of an environment that guarantees the success of the learner. However,
     fully realized gamification to improve motivation requires good instrumentation
     (see Chapter 5) and a clear representation of learner identity.
           Because behavior is dynamic and complex, effective motivating factors are
                                                      Tools for Learner Motivation | 341



likely to change over time—both in general and in gamified activities. A learner
may value participation and social recognition one day, while on a different day
they may value listening to others or simply interacting non-socially with learning
materials. Strategy games or games that involve role-playing with others may target
different types of motivations. Consequently, it’s useful for learning engineers to
have a toolkit of gamification operations to draw from. If we consider the learning
modality of an online game, Zachary Morford and his colleagues 3 describe the fol-
lowing as elements of gamification that are likely to increase game-playing behavior
and maintain learners’ engagement:

   ► Gamification may provide learners with the option to choose between learning
      modalities. By doing so, learners acquire control over the actions needed to
      access consequences and outcomes and to achieve goals aligned with values.
   ► Game environments may allow for immediate contact with the consequences
      of a learner’s behavior, in environments where those consequences wouldn’t
      be easily accessible.
   ► High variation in learning environments and materials decreases habituation
      (that is, decreased responding due to repetitive or prolonged exposure to a
      source of stimulation). For example, while a long lecture given in a monotone
      voice is likely to decrease students’ attention, the elements of novelty, variation,
      interaction, or even physical activity (as often involved in game-playing) are
      likely to sustain longer periods of their engagement.
   ► When rewards or other positive outcomes are arranged to be delivered in
      ways that are unpredictable to the learner, a more stable and constant pattern
      of game-playing is typically observed versus when all outcomes follow a
      predictable pattern. For example, it’s known that when response-dependent
      rewards are scheduled to be delivered after a variable time interval (not known
      to the learner), responses associated with that reward are likely to show a more
      persistent pattern of responding over time.4
   ► Contacting a variety of highly valued reinforcers while playing a game
      increases the overall likelihood of game-playing behavior and thus exposure
      to and contact with the learning materials.
   ► Because coercive strategies are absent from the learning experience, learning
      becomes a pleasant experience rather than an aversive one. While traditional
      approaches to education often involve doing things to avoid a negative
      consequence (studying to avoid a bad grade or doing homework to avoid a
342 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



           reprimand),5 games are self-initiated and maintained by both immediate
           reinforcers and by the long-term natural reinforcers of the learning process
           (which are value-oriented). In gamification, letter grades associated with
           passing or failing can be replaced by words that are indicative of continuing
           progress such as novice, apprentice, and expert.6 Gamification blurs the stark
           work / play distinction that characterizes the former as a non-desirable activity
           that the learner seeks to avoid or escape, and the latter, as a highly desirable
           activity that the learner seeks out. Even low probability actions that a learner
           may not spontaneously initiate in real life (such as leading social interactions
           with peers or writing a descriptive narrative about a topic) may be more likely
           in a role-play situation or as an element of a game.

            Another motivational aspect that accounts for the increased engagement of
     learners who are exposed to gamification is that games afford the possibility to
     apply (and evaluate) integrated skills in relevant contexts. Instructional activities
     designed to resemble a game may include objectives that integrate skills from
     different subject matters. Solving a problem may entail, for example, interacting
     in a simulated situation that requires math, science, and art skills. Also, a gamified
     approach that includes situations that resemble real-world challenges may facilitate
     the generalization of the acquired skills to different contexts and settings. By making
     the learning experience useful and relevant, such games aren’t only continuously
     motivating but can also be ecologically valid. Finally, by accessing learners’
     progress in the relevant skills and objectives, gamified experiences can positively
     impact learners’ motivation. Viewing user-friendly visual representations of their
     performance is often an effective reinforcer and an immediate indicator of learners’
     success.


     Big ‘M’ and Small ‘m’ Motivators
     As discussed earlier, learners have short-term (getting through an assignment or
     activity) and long-term (completing a course or credential) motivations. It’s erroneous
     to assume all learners are driven to do well for the sake of finding a purpose or
     meaning in life. While some may be in search of learning for sake of learning,
     others are seeking a diploma, a trade, college admission, or gainful employment.
     Understanding and identifying the kinds of things that motivate people is a first step
     in identifying what motivating operations might be employed.
                                                   Tools for Learner Motivation | 343



CATEGORIES OF HUMAN MOTIVATION

Across business and academic domains there are multiple perspectives on how to
classify human motivation. (The motivational categories provided earlier in this
chapter and shown in Figure 15.1 represent just one approach to the categorization of
motivation.) Daniel Pink discusses the puzzle of motivation and distills it to auton-
omy, mastery, and purpose.7 Daisy Yuhas in a Scientific American article identified
three critical elements for sustained motivation: 8
      • Autonomy: You gain motivation when you feel in charge
      • Value: You stay motivated when you’re true to your beliefs / values
      • Competence: Through work and growth you gain a sense of competence
Patrick C. Friman identified six sources of motivational reinforcement: 9
      •   Personal growth: Achievements show progress; increase self-confidence
      •   Giving: Naturally reinforcing effect of contributing to others’ well-being
      •   Belonging: Acquiring a sense of connection with others or belonging
      •   Significance: Acquiring a sense of being valued and recognized by others
      •   Certainty: Having control that something will happen reliably
      •   Uncertainty: Excitement of something yet to happen, an unknown outcome
Finally, Yu-kai Chou’s Octalysis framework lists eight gamification core drives: 10
      •   Empowerment
      •   Accomplishment
      •   Ownership
      •   Social Value
      •   Meaning
      •   Unpredictability
      •   Scarcity
      •   Avoidance
       Five of Chou’s categories are what he calls “white hat gamification,” for
example, motivators about conditions people desire, and three of Chou’s categories
are what he calls “black hat gamification,” for example, categories of conditions
that people tend to avoid. It isn’t necessarily bad to use these negative motivators.
For example, an award is considered valuable because of scarcity; an award that’s
plentiful, that everyone receives, may not be as much of a motivator. Another
example is unpredictability; a learning game with Easter eggs that learners can
discover may motivate them to play longer. The following table provides a crosswalk
of the categories from these four different sources. (See Figure 15.5.)
344 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



            Even though behavioral scientists and authors have different ways of
     classifying motivational factors, there are overlaps in these frameworks. For
     example, the definitions of significance, meaning, and purpose are separate labels
     for similar concepts in three of the frameworks. It’s not so important which labels are
     chosen. Rather, it’s critical for learning engineering teams to consider the full range
     of relevant variables and to develop strategies that address them with motivating
     operations within a learning engineering solution.


     Human Motivator Categories
      Friman 11             Chou 12              Pink 13               Yuhas 14
      Positive Motivators

      Certainty             Empowerment          Autonomy              Autonomy

      Personal Growth       Accomplishment       Mastery               Competence

                            Ownership                                  Value

      Giving
                            Social
      Belonging

      Significance          Meaning              Purpose

      Negative Motivators

                            Avoidance

      Uncertainty           Unpredictability

                            Scarcity

     FIGURE 15.5. Crosswalk of four human motivator frameworks
                                                            Tools for Learner Motivation | 345



Endnotes
1   Michael, Jack and Caio Miguel. “Motivating Operations.” In Applied Behavior Analysis, edited
    by John O. Cooper, Timothy E. Heron, William L. Heward, 374–391. 2nd ed. NJ: Merrill Prentice
    Hall, 2007.
2   Corbett, Sara. “Learning by Playing: Video Games in the Classroom.” The New York Times
    Magazine, September 19, 2010. www.nytimes.com/2010/09/19/magazine/19video-t.html
3   Morford, Zachary H., Benjamin N. Witts, Kenneth J. Killingsworth & Mark P. Alavosius.
    “Gamification: The Intersection Between Behavior Analysis and Game Design Technologies.” The
    Behavior Analyst 37, no. 1 (2014): 25–40. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40614-014-0006-1
4   Cooper, John O., Timothy E. Heron, and William L. Heward. Applied Behavior Analysis. 3rd ed.
    Hoboken, NJ: Pearson Education, 2019.
5   Michael, Jack. “A Behavioral Perspective on College Teaching.” The Behavior Analyst 14, no. 2
    (1991): 229–239. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03392578
6   Corbett, “Learning by Playing.”
7   Pink, Dan. “The Puzzle of Motivation.” TEDGlobal 2009. Video, 18:23. July 2009.
    www.ted.com/talks/dan_pink_the_puzzle_of_motivation
8   Yuhas, Daisy. “Three Critical Elements Sustain Motivation: When It Comes To Cultivating
    Genius, Talent Matters, But Motivation May Matter More.” Scientific American, November 1,
    2012. www.scientificamerican.com/article/three-critical-elements-sustain-motivation
9   Friman, Patrick. 2020. “Metaphysical Sources of Reinforcement.” Presentation at the Behavior
    Analysis Association of Mississippi Convention, Mississippi, November 2–5, 2020.
10 Chou, Yu-kai. Actionable Gamification: Beyond Points, Badges and Leaderboards. Createspace
   Independent Publishing Platform, 2015.
11 Friman, “Metaphysical Sources of Reinforcement.”
12 Chou, Actionable Gamification.
13 Pink, “The Puzzle of Motivation.”
14 Yuhas, “Three Critical Elements Sustain Motivation.”
CHAPTER 16


Implementation Tools
by Jodi Lis, Jessie Chuang, and Jordan Richard Schoenherr



This chapter further unpacks the implementation phase of the learning
engineering process presented in Chapter 1. This chapter includes a
checklist for implementation of a learning engineering solution.


Learning engineering doesn’t end with the completion of a product, process,
or pedagogy. Once developed, the creation must be implemented within specific
environmental contexts. Prior to releasing the engineered solution “into the wild,”
the learning engineering team must consider the specific deployment strategies
along with how data will be collected and used to inform iterative improvement
of the solution. Implementation issues are considered as implementation planning
during the creation stage of the learning engineering process and then during
implementation stage other issues that couldn’t have been anticipated at the time of
design need to be addressed.
        This chapter includes an implementation framework (in the form of a check-
list) that outlines considerations for learning engineering teams when planning and
managing (or monitoring) the implementation phase. Ultimately, the effectiveness
of any learning engineering solution is dependent on the people and organization in
which it’s deployed. It’s up to learning engineers to ensure that all reasonable steps
have been taken during the creation phase to ensure that a solution can be adapted to
all relevant learning contexts. This often means the development of implementation
resources, an implementation plan, and / or an implementation guide. The nature of
these resources depend on the project and factors such as the complexity of the work
needed to successfully implement the innovation.
        The following tool contains a summary of the domains that should be
considered for implementation and a list of key questions for consideration. We also
provide some illustrative examples to demonstrate the kinds of considerations that
can be relevant in the context of learning engineering.



DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-21
348 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




                 Implementation Considerations Framework
        DOMAINS                                            QUESTIONS
   1. Policies and         • What are the relevant policies in the context of the implementation?
   Strategy                • What are the relevant strategies in the context of the implementation?

                           • Is adequate funding available for implementation?
   2. Budget               • If full funding isn’t available now, should it be rolled out over
                             time, starting with a more limited scope or population?

   3. Material
                           • Are adequate resources in place for implementation?
   Resources

                           • How will the leadership support the roll-out,
   4. Leadership and         implementation and evaluation of the product?
   Organizational
   Capacity                • Does the organization have the human resource
                             talent needed to support the implementation?

                           • What roles and expertise are needed to manage, support, monitor,
                             and implement the solution (such as, administrative support,
   5. Team                   program coordination, technology, data management)?
                           See Chapter 10, Tools for Teaming

                           • What technologies are required to respond to the challenge?
   6. Technology
                           See Chapter 14, Software and Technology Standards as Tools

                           Deployment and Delivery
                           • What’s the process to integrate the solution into the existing culture?
                           • What’s the process to integrate it into the existing environment?
                           • What is the process to deliver the product to the users?
                           Commitment and Support
                           • What’s the strategy to demonstrate the product is beneficial / useful?
                           • What’s the process to manage changes in process and
                             behavior needed for e!ective implementation?
   7. Operationalization
                           User or Learner
                           • What preparation is needed for users to engage with the solution?
                           • What support is provided to the user?
                           Professional Development and Mentorship
                           • Is professional development needed for those supporting learners?
                           • If professional development is needed, how will that be provided?
                           • Will support be provided within the organization?
                           • Are external parties required?
                                                                Implementation Tools | 349




              Implementation Considerations Framework
     DOMAINS                                       QUESTIONS
                     • What is the process to identify, collect, monitor,
                       review, and document data (stakeholder perceptions,
                       learning, usage patterns) during implementation?
8. Instrumentation   • Is the instrumentation developed during the Creation
                       phase to collect data fully deployed and operational?
                     See Chapter 5, Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation

                     • What qualitative and quantitative variables will
                       be monitored during implementation?
                     • How will the data be analyzed, interpreted, and represented?
9. Investigation     • To what extent do they represent industry standards or best practices?
During
                     • How might these analyses inform future Challenge
Implementation
                       phases and iterative improvements and cost-benefit
                       analysis regarding the future of the product?
                     See Chapter 6, Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 2): Analytics

                     • Does the implementation process comply with organizational,
                       regional, national and international standards, for example,
                       data privacy, consent, anonymity, and confidentiality?
                     • Have ethical considerations beyond compliance been considered?
10. Ethics           • What ethical dimensions have been evaluated?
                     • How have trade-o!s and conflicts of interests been addressed?
                     See Chapter 7, Learning Engineering is Ethical
                     See Chapter 17, Ethical Decision Tools

                     • What is the current scale of implementation?
                     • What plans or strategies are established for scaling up? What are the
11. Scale-up and
                       associated costs (human, financial, social capital) of scaling up?
Sustainability
                     • What foreseeable problems are likely to occur? What are the
                       strategies in place for risk assessment and management?

FIGURE 16.1. Learning engineering implementation checklist
350 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Implementation Considerations Framework Examples
     1. POLICIES AND STRATEGY

     What are the policies / strategies to support the implementation?


     A solution should support and comply with local or organizational policies and
     strategies. It could be to achieve an objective in the strategy, work toward an
     overarching goal, or extend the strategy beyond its initial purpose. In the example
     described below about e-learning in Zambia, e-learning is a pillar in Ministry
     of Health’s eHealth strategy. The e-learning initiative worked toward achieving
     the goal of that pillar. In Chapter 5, Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1):
     Instrumentation, sensors were used to encode communication and determine
     how well a team followed communications protocols. Precise communication was
     essential for the safety and work of the team. The investigation involved complying
     and aligning with policies and strategies such as the US Army’s communication
     strategies, security and privacy policies, and technology procedures.


     2. BUDGET

     Is adequate funding available for implementation for sustained use? Budgeting will
     include human resources, technical resources and other materials, training, imple-
     mentation, monitoring, and scale-up.


     Any solution must be budgeted adequately. Consideration must be given to how
     much funding is needed, where the funding will come from, and if the funding
     will be stable and available. Also, if you plan to scale up a solution, then future cost
     must be considered. There are many instances in which the funding is available to
     develop, test, and pilot a solution but the scale-up and expansion of the solution isn’t
     thought about until it’s too late. Budgeting for the creation stage is only part of put-
     ting a solution into practice. It’s important to consider what funding may be required
     and if the source of funding will be stable past the research or pilot phase to scale the
     solution and add more users.
            The objective of Open edX, the open-source software platform described in
     Chapter 4, Learning Engineering is Engineering, was to build a learning platform
     using a broad range of robust, effective learning techniques. From its inception the
                                                            Implementation Tools | 351



plan was for the platform to scale to support thousands of courses and reach millions
of students. Attention was paid to making course creation effective yet economical
with low investment.
      It’s been estimated that the cost of content and platform development of the
original Open edX platform and first course were roughly a half-million dollars.
Beyond the cost to develop and deploy the platform, the team also calculated the
return-on-investment to scale Open edX: $1 in per-student cost or benefit equals
roughly $1000 per course when assuming an average of 1000 students per course,
and $1 in per-course cost or benefit equals roughly $1000 per platform. The financial
plan worked. Open edX became the learning technology behind edX, the online
learning platform co-founded by Harvard and MIT, and Open edX has since evolved
to support higher education, enterprise, and government organizations.


3. MATERIAL RESOURCES

Are resources in place for the product for implementation?


Material resources, consumables, and other accessories may be required for the
solution. These are in addition to the technology and human resources. In Chapter 1,
Learning Engineering is a Process, virtual reality equipment for a class at MIT was
required for the solution. Were there enough headsets for the amount of students in
the classroom? Budgeting and procuring them was essential. Without the headsets,
there would’ve been no solution.
       A simulation environment in a medical school in Chapter 3, Learning
Engineering is Human-Centered, and Chapter 7, Learning Engineering is Ethical,
allowed medical students, student nurses, and others to learn surgical and clinical
skills by practicing them without risking the safety of live patients. The lab required
a set-up with a vast range of material resources. In the operating room simulations,
learners performed the roles of nurse, anesthetist, and other clinicians on a simula-
tion mannequin placed on a gurney in the room with vital signs displayed on moni-
tors along with the rhythmic beeps of the simulated patient’s pulse. Technicians and
educators sat behind a one-way mirror voicing the mannequin and running through
a crisis situation by changing the simulated patient’s vital signs. In multipurpose
training spaces, students moved around in groups of five or six to different simu-
lation stations learning skills on tools and resources ultrasound and laparoscopic
trainers, intubation, whole or parts of cadavers, and simulated tissue. The point is:
352 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     When planning the intervention, ensuring that material resources and consumables
     are available and working properly are essential to the solution.


     4. LEADERSHIP AND ORGANIZATIONAL CAPACITY

     How will the leadership support the roll-out and implementation of the product?


     With any new approach or solution, leadership is needed to support, implement, and
     encourage new, different, innovative, and nontraditional methods. Change manage-
     ment is a key ingredient in learning engineering.
            An example of how leadership enables research, testing, and change is offered
     in Chapter 5, Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation. As chief
     learning officer at Kaplan, Inc., Bror Saxberg and his team had questions on what
     was happening around the learning that the current science couldn’t answer. The re-
     search lacked evidence about what worked for their specific student population and
     within the context of their delivery model. To test the impact of their interventions
     on student learning and implement the best approaches at scale, the chief learning
     officer, the vice president of measurement and evaluation, and other members on
     the learning team created a research pipeline for their own experiments to accumu-
     late credible evidence about what measurably improved learning outcomes for their
     students. In this example, the leadership made the human resources available and
     developed the organizational capacity for the research pipeline. Without the support
     and resources provided by the leadership, they couldn’t have been successful.


     5. TEAM (HUMAN) RESOURCES

     Who’s on the team to manage, support, monitor, and implement the product (pro-
     gram coordination, IT, data management, and other needs)? What are their roles?


     Learning engineering can be a team sport, as described in Chapter 10, Tools for
     Teaming. The team that produced the game in Ghana from Chapter 3, Learning
     Engineering is Human-Centered, had many players. (See Figure 16.2 for a summary
     of stakeholders by phase.) Leti Arts, the gaming company, was involved throughout
     the learning engineering process. The roles on the team included a project manager,
     a creative director, game programmers, developers, illustrators, and sound experts.
                                                           Implementation Tools | 353



The international development organization that contracted Leti Arts had a project
manager and technical experts to create, implement and investigate the solution.
Government officials from the Ghana Ministry of Health and Ghana Health Services
along with representatives of health organizations and medical associations were
involved in the creation and implementation phases.




                                                                                     INSTRUMENTATION
                                                                    IMPLEMENTATION




                                                                                                       INVESTIGATION
                                                         CREATION
Leti Arts team                                             x            x                x                x
International organization managing the project            x            x                x                x
Government, Ministry of Health, Ghana Health Services      x            x                x
Local health organizations                                 x
Medical profession associations                            x            x
Peer educators from the community                          x            x
MSM population                                             x            x                x

FIGURE 16.2. Leti Arts example showing di!erent teams during di!erent phases

       Peer educators from the community implemented the game. They learned how
to integrate the game into the training and assistance that they provided to the com-
munity. They supported and introduced the game to the target population. For the
investigation, instrumentation was built into the scenarios. The Leti Arts team gath-
ered the data and prepared reports for the project team. The project team reviewed
the decisions made in the scenarios with the peer educators and noted the areas in
which further reinforcement would be helpful. That information from the investiga-
tion was also incorporated into other outreach strategies.


6. TECHNOLOGY AND INFRASTRUCTURE

What tools and processes are needed?


Wikipedia defines technology as “the sum of techniques, skills, methods, and
354 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     processes used in the production of goods or services.” The case studies through-
     out this book all include a form of technology, from a donkey cart in West Africa
     described in Chapter 1, Learning Engineering is a Process, to complex software
     such as adaptive learning systems used by the US Army in Chapter 5, Learning
     Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation, to designing learning for two-
     and three-year-old children in Chapter 3, Learning Engineering is Human-Centered.
     The technology may be a single solution or may include an interoperable solution
     of several platforms and applications. Implementation focuses on how to build and
     operationalize these technologies and other components needed for the solution.


     7. OPERATIONALIZATION

     What is the process for the solution to be integrated into the existing culture and
     learning environment?


     The answer to this question requires its own learning engineering processes and
     sub-process cycles. Every implementation context may be different, have unique
     challenges, and require different approaches, plans, and solutions to problems.

     See example: Zambia case study below.


     8. INSTRUMENTATION

     What’s the process to identify, collect, monitor, review, and document data (stake-
     holder perceptions, learning, usage patterns) during implementation?


     The early phases of the learning engineering process (understanding the challenge
     and the creation phase) include determining what questions to answer and develop-
     ing a system to gather that data, for example, the instrumentation. A focus of the im-
     plementation phase is to ensure that the data sources are accessible and the systems
     are working to collect and review the data.
            A scenario in Chapter 6, Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 2): Analytics,
     illustrates how a team at Edmentum reviews and interprets analytic results from
     a formative assessment. Edmentum has learning engineers in their company who
     are well-versed in learning sciences, data sciences, and psychometrics, but most
     importantly, can drive the overall learning engineering process. The process to
                                                           Implementation Tools | 355



collect, monitor, and review data is ongoing as products and content are implemented
in the field. As data are collected and insights gained, new cycles of the learning
engineering are initiated. These processes include various team members, who ask
the following kinds of questions:

   ► Learning engineer asks what are the potential causes of the result and what
      additional analyses should be done and actions should be taken.
   ► Learning designer asks if there’s evidence that instruction could lead to
      confusion, is chunked properly, or has distracting elements; and they may
      recommend other pedagogical methods.
   ► Content and assessment developers ask if the content and assessment are
      aligned so that the construct taught is the construct measured.
   ► Psychometrician asks if the passing score is set properly to distinguish
      between learners who have mastered the content and those who haven’t and
      if there’s evidence of multiple correct responses or if students are disengaged.
   ► Implementation consultant asks if there’s evidence that teachers may be
      implementing the system in an unintended way or if there’s anything within
      the context or setting that’s unusual.
   ► Software engineer asks if there’s an error in the calculation of a pass.
   ► User experience or user interface designer asks if there’s evidence of
      construct-irrelevant variance or additional ways to engage learners.


9. INVESTIGATION DURING IMPLEMENTATION

Instrumentation developed during the creation phase will collect data during the
implementation phase. The team must monitor data collection to ensure everything is
working. The team may monitor metrics and do analysis during the implementation
phase to inform mid-implementation course corrections, define challenges for
iterative improvements, and inform future decisions about the product. These metrics
will differ depending on the product, implementation context, and organization.
       What do we want to know? What question do we want to answer about the
impact? Based on the question, what data do we need? What are the qualitative and
quantitative variables? Are we collecting the data we need to answer key questions?
Sometimes questions are answered with predefined metrics and methods. Other
times, important features and new questions are discovered through data mining.
       Based on interviews with several private sector companies, Jessie Chuang,
356 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     vice-chair of IEEE’s Industry Connections / Industry Consortium on Learning En-
     gineering (ICICLE) and chair of Corporate Special Interest Group, identified the
     following metrics that companies often care about monitoring during the implemen-
     tation of solutions:
           •   Engagement
           •   Empowerment of employees
           •   Transformation
           •   Employee well-being
           •   Experience and satisfaction
           •   Diversity and inclusivity
           •   Personalized learning
           In the Introduction Chapter, What is Learning Engineering, we described how
     Duolingo looks at metrics. For every design decision the Duolingo team makes, they
     consider multiple metrics of success. Those metrics include measures of learning,
     measures of user engagement, and how user interactions impact the company’s
     bottom line. They know that to continue to provide free language learning to millions
     of people around the world they need to stay in business. This means that every
     decision is a balance between these metrics. They run controlled experiments for
     almost everything that they change. If they can improve one metric without hurting
     the others, they do it.


     10. ETHICS

     Consequences of the solution may arise that couldn’t have been known or predicted
     in the creation of the solution and instrumentation. It’ll be important during imple-
     mentation to periodically evaluate how the solution is being implemented and the
     data being collected.
           • Do the development and implementation processes comply with
             organizational, regional, national, and international standards, for
             example, data privacy, consent, anonymity, and confidentiality?
           • Have ethical considerations beyond compliance been considered?
           • What ethical dimensions have been evaluated?
           • How have trade-offs and conflicts of interests been addressed?
           Chapter 7, Learning Engineering is Ethical, describes several approaches to
     ethical sense-making and provides examples of ethical frameworks. Also, the ethics
     decision tool in Chapter 17, Ethical Decision-Making Tools, is a matrix for ethical
                                                             Implementation Tools | 357



design. The matrix has domains to consider and review when designing and imple-
menting the solution. As the solution is being implemented it’s important to remain
vigilant about how the processes are developed, how the solution is being used, and
how data are collected, tracked, and applied.


11. SCALE-UP AND SUSTAINABILITY

What’s the plan for the desired scale of implementation?


The intervention may be intended only for a small audience of learners for research,
or it could be piloted with the intent of scaling to support people globally. If the plan
is to scale the solution, a scaling strategy should be thought about at the inception and
established throughout the implementation process. Strategies must be implemented
for risk assessment and management. Open edX was planned from the inception
to scale to thousands of courses and millions of users. Duolingo continues to scale
to more users. The solution in Zambia, illustrated in the following case study, was
designed to scale across the country.



Case Study
HEALTH WORKER E-LEARNING TO SCALE IN ZAMBIA

A viable, trained and experienced health
workforce is essential to provide quali-
ty service delivery. In Zambia, a project
funded by the US Center for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention (CDC) invested in the
education of health workers to improve
their competence in clinical areas from
2016–2020. The project used a blended
learning approach including e-learning
and on-site mentorship to train the health
providers. An international health organi-
zation supported the Ministry of Health to
implement the project.
358 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




                        IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS
                        E-learning is a pillar in the Ministry of Health’s (MOH) National
                        eHealth Strategy. It was identified as an approach for continuous
                        personal development to improve health worker’s competence. In
                        2016 when the project began e-learning wasn’t commonly used as a
    1. Policies and     training method. The MOH didn’t have a learning management system
    Strategy            (LMS), and there was no office in the MOH that managed e-learning.
                        The project supported the strategy by deploying a learning platform,
                        developing courses, incorporating e-learning into their continuous
                        professional development and building capacity in the ministry to use
                        digital learning tools.
                        The intervention was a component in an HIV project funded
                        by the US CDC from 2016 to 2020. An international health
                        organization was contracted to manage it. CDC is continuing
    2. Budget
                        to support the hosting and other components after the
                        completion of that project. As e-learning was a new activity for
                        the MOH budget, they’re identifying mechanisms to fund it.
                        Many health workers didn’t have mobile devices with the
                        specifications needed for the LMS mobile application. The
                        project procured tablets and preloaded them with the learning
    3. Material
                        app and content. A process was developed for distribution to the
    Resources
                        health workers. Technical support was provided by the project
                        and MOH IT sta!. The tablets were returned to the project after
                        completion for redistribution to the next cohort of learners.
                        Leadership consisted of MOH officials, project sta!, and sta! from
    4. Leadership and
                        CDC, the donor who provided the funding for the intervention. The
    Organizational
                        project collaborated with the Ministry throughout the process to build
    Capacity
                        capacity within the government to transition the activity to them.
                        Implementing e-learning as a new tool in capacity building
                        involved a learning engineering team. The team consisted of
                        project sta! who orchestrated and managed every stage of the
                        learning engineering process, MOH officials at the national and
                        district levels, health associations, IT experts at the MOH, subject
                        matter experts, health training institutes, and a monitoring team.
    5. Human
                        The project contracted out the development of the courses and
    Resources
                        deployment of the LMS. That team included the instructional
    and Team
                        designer, project manager, technical sta! for the learning platform
                        and experts for graphics, multimedia, e-learning authoring and
                        voicing. At the end of the project, the management of activities
                        and administration of the learning platform was transitioned to a
                        university teaching hospital. They are managing and implementing
                        telementoring and other digital learning activities for health workers.
                        The project procured tablets for the e-learning. The courses and
                        additional reference materials were loaded on tablets using an
    6. Technology       o!-line mobile solution. An o!-line solution was essential because
                        many facilities had no or limited internet connectivity. Courses
                        were downloaded onto the tablet and could be taken o!-line.
                                                                   Implementation Tools | 359




                        IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS
                        Commitment and Support: The project worked the IT department,
                        the health workforce department, and clinical areas at national,
                        regional, district, and community levels of the MOH. Through
                        workshops, site visits, and meetings the Ministry’s capacity and
                        understanding of e-learning and blended learning grew. The Ministry
                        came to support and promote e-learning. The leadership at the
                        Ministry sent official announcements and letters to all health workers
                        in the country to take the courses for continuous professional
                        development and licensure. Health workers were excited to have the
                        opportunity. They liked the engagement and found the courses useful
                        and applicable to providing services. E-learning has become an
                        integral point of professional learning at the MOH.

                        Integration: A blended learning approach was used, consisting
                        of e-learning, on-site mentorship, and a WhatsApp community of
                        practice. Interactive, case-based courses in HIV, TB, and maternal
                        and newborn health were developed. They complemented clinical
                        skills practice during on-site mentorship, which learners continued to
                        receive. WhatsApp was used to communicate, share information, and
                        ask questions. Expert clinicians provided guidance and advice via
                        WhatsApp. Through these activities, the health providers gained new
                        skills and improved the quality of services delivered.
7. Operationalization
                        Professional Development: Selected experienced providers from
                        district training teams served as mentors. Workshops were held
                        to introduce e-learning first to the mentors. Using technology for
                        learning was new to them. They learned how to incorporate it into
                        their mentoring processes and use it to enhance their skills. The
                        mentors also learned how to use the learning application and tablets.

                        Learners Use and Support: After the mentors in the designated
                        cohort learned the blended learning approach and use of the learning
                        application, they trained health workers whom they mentored how to
                        access the e-learning on the tablets that were distributed to health
                        providers. The health providers took the courses on their own time
                        over two months. They also referred to the e-learning and other
                        documentation on the tablet for reference when managing patients.
                        The learners continued to receive on-site mentoring and received
                        continuous development points when they completed the courses.

                        Delivery: The project worked in three regions of the country. Regions
                        had several districts. Implementation started with one cohort of thirty
                        health workers on one district, then increased to two-hundred health
                        workers in three districts in 2017. The MOH rolled out the courses
                        nationwide in 2019, and by 2021 over ten-thousand health workers
                        registered for the courses.
360 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




                         IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS
                         The objective of the intervention was to improve the competence
                         of health workers in clinical areas. The learning was tracked and
                         monitored using data from the learning platform, mentoring checklists
                         that the mentors and health workers used during site visits at the
    8. Instrumentation
                         facilities, observation examinations on clinical skills, and facility data
                         to track the performance improvement in delivery of services for HIV
                         and tuberculous. Noting topics within the clinical areas that weren’t
                         improving, adjustments were made within the training and mentoring.
                         Data collected during implementation suggested that e-learning
                         improved service delivery in two ways. Training previously involved
                         sending workers on workshops o!-site, which took the providers
                         away from their clinics. The prior approach was also expensive
                         and ine!ective, as workers retained very little of the information
                         delivered. The design, approach, and delivery of the e-learning
                         improved learning experiences with health workers gaining
                         and retaining new knowledge and skills. The blended learning
    9. Investigation     increased the number of HIV and TB sites in districts that could
    During               provide clinical care to areas that previously didn’t have it.
    Implementation       In keeping with the iterative learning engineering process,
                         the team acknowledged both successes and remaining
                         challenges. The challenges: health worker shortages remain
                         common, and education and training of health workers is
                         under-invested. As a result, the country began exploring and
                         expanding other approaches such as telementoring for training
                         and telemedicine to improve access and quality of care. The
                         iterative learning engineering process can be applied to the
                         creation and implementation of these other approaches.
                         Data collected on building capacity among health workers
    10. Ethics
                         followed the considerations and policies in place by the MOH.
                         From the onset, this five-year project was funded for its full five
                         years, with a plan to transition the activity to the government
                         upon completion. The project worked in conjunction with
                         MOH officials at the national and district levels, national
                         health worker councils and associations, IT experts at the
                         MOH, subject-matter experts, health training institutes, and
    11. Scale-up and     other stakeholders throughout the period of intervention.
    Sustainability       In the last year of the project, a series of meetings was held to
                         finalize the transition. An example of one of these decisions was the
                         administration and management of the LMS. It will initially continue
                         to be hosted by an outside contractor, with the plan to move the
                         platform to a local Zambian vendor to manage and maintain it in the
                         future. The activities are now led by the university teaching hospital,
                         which was already involved with other digital education activities.
CHAPTER 17


Ethical Decision-
Making Tools
by Jordan Richard Schoenherr and Jodi Lis



This chapter builds on the concepts presented in Chapter 7 and o!ers
a decision process tool to guide practitioners in an ethical practice of
learning engineering.


Learning engineering is a value-laden process. Learning engineers must consider
the ethical affordances of instructional design and assessment in addition to
technical affordances. Values and ethics must inform all phases of the design and
implementation process. Although some value-based checklists are available (for
example, Carnegie Mellon University’s Designing Ethical AI Experiences: Checklist
and Agreement), learning engineering requires questions that are specific to the
design process. Consequently, this chapter presents an ethics assessment instrument.
These tools have been developed to be complementary. The Sense-making Ethical
Evaluation Matrix for Ethical Design (SEEM-ED) reflects a bottom-up approach
that learning engineers can use when developing products and processes. SEEM-
ED assumes that there are two relevant dimensions to ethical assessment: (1) ethical
principles and (2) the stage of the learning engineering process.
       Numerous ethical principles can inform the learning engineering process.
Principles can be found in codes of conduct as well as legal standards. Codes tend
to provide high-level values that might not be clearly specified for a specific learn-
ing engineering context. Legal standards reflect minimal standards associated with
compliance rather than more complex, dynamic ethical concerns. Consequently, eth-
ical sense-making requires that we consider the ethical affordances, disaffordances,
and dysaffordances of a design—how a design assists users and how the design can
impede or discriminate against users. This requires considering technological affor-
dances as well as social and mental processes. These topics are reviewed in more



DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-22
362 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     detail in Chapter 7.
            SEEM-ED is a design assessment instrument for developers that asks specific
     questions about the design and addresses features of the ethical sense-making process.
     SEEM-ED assumes that ethical principles can be translated into specific questions
     of values and ethics. It additionally assumes that these questions should be asked
     throughout the learning engineering process during the identification of challenges,
     the iterations of the design process, the implementation of a design, and through later
     investigation. Moreover, we must consider how related and complementary designs
     compete and cooperate in sociotechnical systems (Chapter 3).
            A demonstration of the SEEM-ED approach is provided in Figure 17.1. Here,
     we adopt the principles of the American Psychological Association to address issues
     related to teaching, research, and practice. These principles should then be used to
     inform each stage of the learning engineering process.
            A crucial feature of the SEEM-ED approach is that it doesn’t reflect a simple
     checklist. At a quantitative level, each question is assessed in terms of a continuum
     of responses. At a minimum, evaluation should use a three-point scale (represented
     below as Yes, Maybe, and No); however, a five-point scale (for example, Strong-
     ly Disagree, Disagree, Neither Agree nor Disagree, Agree, and Strongly Agree)
     would provide a greater level of precision. At each stage, a representative group
     of stakeholders should use the instrument to provide their ratings and responses
     independently. These responses can then be averaged to obtain an overall score on
     each dimension. If there are concerns about social influences, this process should be
     conducted anonymously.
            At a qualitative level, learning engineers and stakeholders should be able to
     articulate coherent responses to each question such that more questions are raised.
     Below each of the ratings, follow-up question(s) are presented. Each of these
     questions requires that the evaluators consider deeper questions and responses to
     social and ethical issues.
            When using the scale, learning engineers and stakeholders involved in
     participatory design should experience uncertainty such that the scale identifies
     ethical vulnerabilities in the design process. As we progress through the learning
     engineering process, more questions and greater specificity in the kinds of questions
     and answers suggest that SEEM-ED is being used effectively. All stakeholders
     should gain a better idea of the trade-offs between design approaches in terms of
     functionality and value.
                                                           Ethical Decision-Making Tools | 363




   Sense-Making Ethical Evaluation Matrix for Ethical Design
1. FIDELITY AND RESPONSIBILITY
Will the product / process promote trust in users and the general public?        Yes / Maybe / No
How will you assess trust / confidence in the product / process?

Have local regulations (laws, policies, guidelines) been reviewed and            Yes / Maybe / No
incorporated into the design?
How have experts in these domains been engaged?

Have users and other stakeholders been consulted?                                Yes / Maybe / No
Are there any accessibility issues that might limit this process?

Does the design comply with relevant codes of conduct (for example, IEEE)?       Yes / Maybe / No
How have codes and guidelines been identified?

Are there conflicts of interests? Conflicts between codes, laws, and police?     Yes / Maybe / No
How are they resolved?

Have material, financial, and human resources been used efficiently?             Yes / Maybe / No
How have these measures been selected?

2. INTEGRITY
Have developers / designers clearly shared their competencies and limits?        Yes / Maybe / No
What barriers to knowledge translation are possible?

Have any intentional or unintentional errors or biases been corrected?           Yes / Maybe / No
How have corrections been reported / addressed?

Have the features of the product / process been represented accurately?          Yes / Maybe / No
How have you ensured that users understand these features?

Have only those parties contributing to the design been acknowledged?            Yes / Maybe / No
What criteria were used to determine contributorship?

Have all parties contributing to the design been acknowledged?                   Yes / Maybe / No
How have parties been acknowledged? Are di!erent criteria used for each group?

3. BENEFICENCE AND NONMALEFICENCE
Are there foreseeable short- and medium-term harms and benefits?                 Yes / Maybe / No
What risk management framework and mitigation strategies have been used?
Are there foreseeable long-term harms and benefits?                              Yes / Maybe / No
What risk management framework and mitigation strategies have been used?
Do users understand the harms / benefits?                                        Yes / Maybe / No
How have harms/benefits been communicated to users? Which individuals,
communities, and governmental organizations have been involved?
364 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




     Sense-Making Ethical Evaluation Matrix for Ethical Design
  Have the real, perceived, and potential risks been assessed?                                     Yes / Maybe / No
  Which stakeholders and experts are engaged? Are they a representative group?
  Have users’ experiences be assessed in the long term?                                            Yes / Maybe / No
  How have these measures been identified? What kind of risk models will be used?

  4. JUSTICE
  Will the harms / benefits be distributed equally among users and nonusers?                       Yes / Maybe / No
  How have the user and nonuser population been identified? How will you address
  trade-o!s between groups? How have these been justified?
  Will benefits / harms be shared in all geographic regions in which the                           Yes / Maybe / No
  product / process operates?
  Why will these regions be a!ected? How have geographic boundaries been
  identified?
  Is the product / process accessible?                                                             Yes / Maybe / No
  What are the solution’s a!ordances, disa!ordances, and dysa!ordances?
  Are users’ rights protected by the design of the product / process?                              Yes / Maybe / No
  What legal/ethical frameworks have been used? How have you assessed “rights”
  in the context of this project?
  Are users’ rights potentially threatened by the design of product / process?                     Yes / Maybe / No
  Are there alternative designs that might limit potential threats? Have stakeholders’
  experiences and perceptions been used to inform the design process?
  Will user / nonuser rights di!er depending on the geographic region?                             Yes / Maybe / No
  How will you address regional di!erences? How will you communicate these
  di!erences to users?

  5. RESPECT FOR PEOPLE’S RIGHTS AND DIGNITY
  Does the product / process protect users’ rights to privacy / confidentiality?                   Yes / Maybe / No
  How have you assessed privacy? How has confidentiality/anonymity been
  preserved in the data?
  Does the design team have ethics education, training, and experience?                            Yes / Maybe / No
  How much experience and in what context was knowledge acquired? Is it
  appropriate to the user population and geographical region?
  Would / will any feature adversely a!ect the self-determination of the user?                     Yes / Maybe / No
  How have you assessed users’ awareness of the consequences of using the
  product / process? How have users been informed / educated?

  FIGURE 17.1. Sensemaking Ethical Evaluation Matrix for Ethical Design
  The SEEM-ED matrix is not meant to be an exhaustive list of questions. Rather, these questions
  represent a starting point. A critical aspect of using the SEEM-ED approach requires that
  all stakeholders contribute to the development of relevant ethical questions.
CHAPTER 18


Data Analysis Tools
by Erin Czerwinski, Tanvi Domadia, Scotty D. Craig,
Jim Goodell, and Steve Ritter



This chapter builds on the concepts from the foundations Chapter 6
on data analysis. It provides a learning analytics process model and
discusses a few other analysis methods and tools.


This chapter begins with an overview of the learning analytics process model. It’s a
guide to the kinds of analytical methods used to answer different kinds of questions.
These methods may be used within a system for feedback to the learner, to people
supporting learners, and to the engineering team to inform iterative improvements
to engineered solutions. Following this, information about the OpenSimon Toolkit
and learning curve analysis is included.


Learning Analytics Process Model 1
In learning engineering, data analytics are part of an experimentally driven learning
sciences approach to iterative improvement. Data analysts on a learning engineering
team help to develop A/B tests to compare various learning conditions, collecting
new experimental data. They also work with others who are experts in the sub-
ject matter, implementation context, and learning sciences to interpret and answer
“why” questions that the data alone can’t answer. Just like the learning engineering
process is iterative, the learning analytics process may be iterative. Analysis begins
with a question and may result in answers and follow-on questions. The following
subsections describe that iterative process. Each corresponds to part of the learning
analytics process model in Figure 18.1—starting from the top.
       The learning analytics process model is a synthesis of concepts from Ryan
Baker’s Massively Open Online Textbook (MOOT), which is made up of a series of
videos and links to the related edX course. The model can be used as a framework


DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-23
   LEARNING ANALYTICS PROCESS MODEL
                     1. What question do we want the data to answer?
    START            2. Do we have the data to answer this question? No                      Instrument to collect data.
    HERE             3. Translate into data questions.
                   Real- world question: Which students need intervention?
                   Data questions: How do I predict the probability? What’s the cutoff for intervention?

                                  PREDICT                             INFER                                    MINE
  ANSWER              How can I accurately predict         What meaning can be inferred          How can I isolate the most
  THE                 new data points (e.g. learner        from the data?                        useful information from a large
  QUESTION            outcomes)?                                                                 data set?

  GOALS               A model to predict a single          An estimate of association            Discover features, patterns,
                      aspect of the data (value or         between an outcome variable           correlations, or anomalies of a
                      category) with high accuracy         and predictor variables.              data set useful for decision
                      and low error                                                              making or further analysis

  EXAMPLES            What’s the probability a             Do the data indicate that a           What features of the data are
                      learner will successfully            learner is bored or frustrated?       most useful for creating a
                      complete this course? Should         Do the data indicate that the         predictive model? What
                      we classify the learner as           learning activity results in          interactions between learners
                      “likely” or “unlikely” to            learning?                             engaged in collaborative
                      complete?                                                                  learning are most productive?


 CHOOSE
                              Predictive                             Inference             FEATURE MINING
 METHOD AND                                                                                                           Mining
 DATA SET                     Modeling                               Modeling              informs modeling


                                                                                                                Preprocessing
 CREATE A                                                                                                       • Analyze
                  Regression                                        Knowledge                Behavior
 MODEL                                  Classification                                                            variables
 USING
                   Prediction                                        Inference               Detection
                                                                                                                • Data reduction
 DATA
                  Methods, e.g.          Methods, e.g.             Methods, e.g.          Methods, e.g.
                • Linear               • Step regression        • BKT +variants         • Carelessness          Data Mine
                  regression                                                              detection             Rules from
                                       • Logistic               • PFA
                                                                                          algorithms            training discovery
                • Support-vector         regression             • IRT
                  machines             • Decision trees         • DKT                                           • Anomalies
                                                                                                                • Association
  CHECK MODEL                                                                                                     rules
                           Use different data to test the model than to create or train it
  GOODNESS                                                                                                      • Clustering
                  examples:              examples:                 Check model             Check model          • Classifying
                  • Linear               • Accuracy                based on how            based on how         • Regression
                                                                                                                                     CC BY Jim Goodell and Steve Ritter




                    correlation          • Kappa                   well it predicts        well it predicts       (model
 CONFIDENCE       • MAD                  • ROC                     performance             behavior               building)
                  • RMSE                 • AUC ROC                                                              • Summarizing
                  • AIC                                                                                         in a new data set

                 Generalizability, Cross-learner validity, Ecological validity, Construct validity,             Test
 VALIDITY
                 Predictive validity, Substantive validity, Content validity, Conclusion validity, Cross        with 3rd data set
                 validation methods (e.g. K-fold)

 VISUALIZE (SOMETIMES)                                              e.g., Learning       e.g., In-Experience
                                                                       Curves                Visual Cues




FIGURE 18.1. Learning Analytics Process Model
CC-BY Jim Goodell and Steve Ritter
                                                              Data Analysis Tools | 367



for use by those doing the analysis and by others on the learning engineering team
who want to understand the kinds of analysis that might be applicable. For a deeper
dive into these topics see Ryan Baker’s MOOT (as well as his MOOC).2


Start with a Question
The process starts by identifying a real-world question that the team hopes the data
can help them answer. Often learning engineering involves experimentation, so the
question might be, “Does learning work best under treatment A or treatment B?”


Translate the Question into a Data Question
The real-world question must be translated into a data question. In Chapter 6 we
looked at a simple hypothetical example where the real-world question might have
been written as, “What number of test prep worked examples should a student
experience to score highest on the LSAT?” A translation of that question might be,
“Given data from previous trials where students experienced zero, eight, or fifteen
worked examples before taking a post-test and using the scores from those post-
tests, can we predict the scores of students exposed to other numbers of worked
examples?” In other words, “Can we predict the number of worked examples likely
to result in the highest score?”


Do we have the data needed to answer the question?
This isn’t a simple question. What we’re really asking is:
      1. Do we have data that can give us an answer or insight?
      2. Are the data sufficient to give us an answer with some level of certainty?
      3. If not, will it be enough to give any value or insight for future iteration?



  If you know almost nothing, almost anything will tell you something.
                           – Douglas W. Hubbard 3

      For the example from Chapter 6 we might have said that the data are insufficient
to predict with any level of certainty. With just three data points (two if we consider
one of the data points was zero worked examples), limited number of participants,
368 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     and the reported margins of error from the original study, we won’t be able to get
     an accurate prediction. However, it might be worth doing just to gain some insights
     about what additional experiments might be needed in a next iteration.


     Is more instrumentation or experimentation needed?
     If the data aren’t sufficient to completely answer the question you might ask what
     additional data are needed and how can you collect them. This might spawn a new
     subproject to develop new instrumentation. Sometimes new experiments need to be
     designed, and sometimes it’s just a matter of collecting more of the same.


     Based on the question, what kind of analysis is needed?
     Look at the table near the top of the Learning Analytics Process Model with the
     headings Predict, Infer, and Mine. Which of these analytics methods is most ap-
     propriate for your data question? Are you trying to forecast something that might
     happen in the future, such as the likelihood of a student passing a course? (If so, use
     predictive modeling.) Are you trying to uncover unobservable or latent factors, such
     as whether a learner is trying to game the system based on their interaction with it?
     (If so, use inference modeling.) Or are you trying to uncover patterns in a large data
     set, such as whether certain test questions show bias for learners from particular
     backgrounds. (If so, use data mining.)


     What analysis technique should I use?
     For each category of analysis there are sets of methods that might be applied. These
     methods are also called analysis or modeling techniques. Our example from Chap-
     ter 6 used a kind of linear regression or curve-fitting. That falls into the “regression
     prediction” category. In that case, the curve was modeled as a quadratic equation. If
     we wanted to predict which students in a data set might answer a problem correct-
     ly given previous answers to similar questions we might use “classification” tech-
     niques. The subsections below outline some common modeling techniques.


     PREDICTIVE MODELING

     The goal of predictive modeling is to develop a model that can infer a single aspect
     of the data (called a “label”) from some combination of other data. It may be used
                                                               Data Analysis Tools | 369



to make predictions about the future; for example, Duolingo uses a model to predict
whether a learner will be able to translate the French phrase le chapeau rouge into
the English phrase the red hat. Predictive modeling may also be used to make infer-
ences about the present, such as predicting if a student is bored during an activity. Or
it could be used to evaluate a design, such as predicting what scores a set of learners
might get on a post-test based on various design options.

   ► Regression Prediction: A model that predicts a number is called a “regressor”
      in data mining. The overall task is called regression. To build a regression, start
      with a data set where you already know the answer—called the training label
      because it’s used to train the model. Associated with each training label record
      are other variables, called features in data mining. The goal of regression is to
      find which features, in what combination, can predict the label’s value.
   ► Classification is used to predict things that aren’t numbers, such as the
      answer to a yes-or-no question. Instead of a number, the label is one of a set
      of categories (a classifier). This is the same as regression prediction except
      we add one or more thresholds; for example, we could say the answer is “yes”
      when a given score is greater than 0.5 and “no” when the variable is less than
      or equal to 0.5.


INFERENCE MODELING

The goal of inference modeling is to estimate an association between an outcome
variable and a predictor variable. In other words, it’s used to understand the relation-
ship between x and y.

   ► Knowledge Inference: The goal of knowledge inference is to estimate a
      person or group of people’s knowledge, skills, or abilities to give feedback
      to learners, instructors, and other stakeholders—including the learning
      engineering team—so they can make the learning conditions better. It’s also
      called latent knowledge estimation, where latent means that something isn’t
      directly measurable (such as confusion or boredom).
   ► Behavior Detection: Automated models can use log data (such as clickstream
      data from an online activity) to infer a learner’s behavior. This can help us
      understand how different behaviors affect learning, which is useful for iterative
      improvement as well as for adaptive systems that respond to behaviors to
      improve learner success.
370 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     MINING

     The goal of mining is to discover features, patterns, correlations, or anomalies
     of a data set that are useful for decision-making or further analysis, for example,
     which features of an instructional design correlate to desired outcomes. (The word
     “discover” implies that mining is more of a method for science than engineering, but
     especially when combined with other techniques these methods can be a valuable
     part of making data sets useful for answering specific engineering questions.)
     Mining techniques include, but aren’t limited to, the following:

        ► Relationship Mining: The goal of relationship mining is to discover variables
           that are related to one another within sets of many variables. Relationship
           mining is also key to big data reduction, that is, reducing the number of
           variables and size of the data set while keeping the relevant information
           needed to answer the question.
        ► Correlation Mining is used to find substantial linear correlations between
           variables. Remember, though: Correlation doesn’t mean causation!
        ► Causal Mining is used to infer causality, as in x causes y.
        ► Association Rule Mining is used to find simple if / then rules in the data set.
           For example, if a learner does x, they’re likely do y. This is useful for finding
           unexpected connections and generating hypotheses.
        ► Sequential Pattern Mining is used for finding patterns over time. For
           example, if a person reads a book on learning engineering now, how likely is
           it that person will take a class on education data mining later?
        ► Network Analysis is used for finding connections and their relative strengths,
           such as in social networks.


     How good is my model?
     For prediction and inference modeling the next step in the process is to test how good
     the model is using different data sets than those used to create the model. Machine
     learning experts call this “model goodness” and recommend using techniques that
     test confidence and validity of a model.
                                                               Data Analysis Tools | 371



CONFIDENCE

Confidence is about how much you can trust that a prediction will be accurate. A
learning engineering team might use classification as described above to predict yes,
a design decision is likely to improve learning, or no, it likely won’t. But a yes with
only a 50.1% confidence is not as good as a yes with a 99% confidence. A learning
engineering team might decide to adopt a design decision that’s predicted to work
only if the confidence is over a certain percentage.
       Design decisions or interventions can have potential benefits and potential
risks. So decisions about whether to act can be made using a cost-benefit analysis.
It’s important to consider, for example, “What’s the cost of an incorrectly applied
intervention or design decision?” along with “What’s the potential benefit of a
correctly applied intervention?” We might be less likely to apply a design decision
that could do a lot of good if there’s also a good chance that it might do harm if
incorrectly applied or applied under certain conditions. In this case, analysis can
suggest when it’s safe to apply a stronger but riskier approach and when to revert to
a weaker but safer one.


VALIDITY

Validity refers to the extent to which a model reflects what you meant it to model.
For example, if a model is meant to analyze a learner’s level of understanding, but
instead it inadvertently measures (or is affected by) their engagement level, then
that model wouldn’t be particularly valid for its intended use. There are multiple
dimensions to consider when testing for validity, including the following:

   ► Generalizability: Does your model (developed with data from one set of
      conditions) transfer to a new context in which you want to use it?
   ► Cross-Learner Validity: If you developed a model to detect learner frustration
      using data from three learners, will that model still work for other learners in
      your target population?
   ► Ecological Validity: If you built a detector in a lab setting will it still work in
      real-life education and training environments?
   ► Construct Validity: Does the model behave in a way consistent with
      theoretical hypotheses?
   ► Predictive Validity: Does the model accurately fit existing data as well
      as future data? For example, if you built a linear model that predicts the
372 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



           relationship between hours studied (from 0 to 10 hours) and post-test scores,
           does the model accurately predict the outcomes of new data, such as the post-
           tests scores of learners who studied for 15 hours?
        ► Content Validity: Does the model cover the full intended scope, such as the
           full range of predicted behaviors or indicators of learner states? Are there
           other indicators that should be considered?
        ► Conclusion Validity: Are your conclusions justified based on the evidence?


     Will it be helpful to visualize the outputs?
     There are times when visualizing data is the best way to spot features for decision-
     making. For example, the learning curve analysis discussed below shows an example
     where we expect to see the error rate go down over time as students learn, but a
     visualization of the data shows a point in time where the error rate jumped. That’s a
     case where the anomaly is much easier to see on a graph than by looking at numbers.




     OpenSimon Toolkit
     Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) has packaged its educational technologies
     developed through decades of educational research into a toolkit for conducting
     learning engineering. These tools support learning design through analysis and
     iterative improvement. Two of these tools support data analytics.
            DataShop 4 is first an open online repository of over 3,000 EdTech data sets.
     It’s also an online tool for analysis of log data from learning activities. It can be
     used to perform various analyses for visualization and modeling of learning data
     like the learning curve analysis shown in Chapter 6 where CMU could visualize the
     learning, or lack thereof, taking place in its first-year math course. These analyses
     also provided key information about which skills students needed more practice
     with, as well as where there were holes in the analytics being collected.
            LearnSphere 5 provides a learning analytics infrastructure within the Open-
     Simon Toolkit. This infrastructure provides the ability to perform repeatable custom
     analysis methods, and stores learning analytics data in a standard format that can
     be analyzed using DataShop. LearnSphere was designed for educational research
     and includes access to anonymized research data sets from multiple platforms via
     its portal.
                                                              Data Analysis Tools | 373



Learning Curve Analysis
ITERATIVE IMPROVEMENT USING OPEN LEARNING INITIATIVE
INSTRUMENTED COURSEWARE


Learning curve analysis can be used to infer whether a student is
receiving sufficient practice for a skill or if there are potential problems
with the instructional or assessment content tied to a specific skill.



The Open Learning Initiative (OLI) at CMU offers courseware with content that
is instrumented to collect learner data, along with its semantic context. Rather than
analyzing page views and time on task, which are proxies for information about
how the students are learning, OLI collects data on user selections to answer
questions and respond to activity interactions that are carefully designed and tagged
to the learning objectives and skills (also known as sub-objectives or knowledge
components) for the purpose of measuring learner mastery toward the stated learning
outcomes. These data drive important feedback loops, delivering data back to the
students, the instructors, learning designers, and the learning science community
(as this anonymized data are collected in large data repositories such as DataShop
and LearnSphere). Instructors use these data, reporting to a dashboard in the OLI
interface, to drive classroom discussions based on which skills might be difficult to
learn for the majority of the students.
       The skill tagging later helps the course developers, in the aggregate, gain more
insight into the learning design of the course. After the course has been completed by
students in any given course cohort, OLI can export the data to DataShop, the world’s
largest repository of learning interaction data. DataShop can provide a visualization
of the data, providing the simplest form of analysis with learning curves.
       Learning curves represent the amount of mastery over each skill. Learning
curve analysis is a kind of knowledge inference. When viewing a learning curve, the
x-axis represents the number of opportunities against a given skill, and the y-axis
represents the aggregated error rate for all the students of that data set. Ideally the
error rate should decrease with each opportunity, which means that the curve always
should slope downward. It’s expected that the more that students practice with a
given outcome, the more adept they’ll become at that skill, and therefore have fewer
errors on problems targeting that skill.
374 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



                                    GOOD                                          PROBLEMATIC
                dist_when_2_var_r_adj_or_not (Category: Good)         categorize_var_on_path_as_collider_non_collider



                                       STUDENT ERROR RATE
                                        (SOLID)
  Error Rate




                              Questions Over Time                            Questions Over Time
                                                    E
                                  LEARNING CURV
                                       (DOTTED)
               FIGURE 18.2. Example learning curves, illustrating a good and a problematic
               skill in a graphical causal modeling course delivered by OLI courseware
               CC-BY Carnegie Mellon University
                 Error Rate




                                                         categorize_var_on_path_as_collider_non_collider

                                                  Questions Over Time

               FIGURE 18.3. Example learning curve representing a problematic skill in
               a graphical causal modeling course delivered by OLI courseware
               CC-BY Carnegie Mellon University
                                                              Data Analysis Tools | 375


                                            X1




                                                         X2




                                            X3




                                            X4

 Categorize each variable on the path X1→X2→X3→X4 as a
 collider or non-collider. Select collider or non-collider.
 X1      !"#$%"&&'()*

 X2      !"#$%"&&'()*

 X3      +"&&'()*

 X4      +"&&'()*

FIGURE 18.4. Viewing a problematic question as part of learning
curve analysis for instructional/assessment content
CC-BY Carnegie Mellon University



       Learning curve analysis can tell us about how students are doing and can be
used to uncover problems with instructional content. For a particular skill, if the
learning curve doesn’t slope downward or shows upward spikes, it might represent
some problem within the learning design for that skill.
       Figure 18.2 shows an example from a course on graphical causal modeling.
In this example, the curve on the left is an example of a good learning curve, and
the one on the right is a problematic learning curve. As seen in Figure 18.3, the
problematic learning curve from the right side is for the skill with the identifier
“categorize_var_on_path_as_collider_non_collider.” From looking at the learning
curve graph, it appears there are a total of six questions in the courseware providing
practice and assessment against this one skill.
376 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



            DataShop offers the ability to explore further and expose more of the data for
     any given point in the graph, offering functionality for the user to click on the point
     at the spike in the learning curve, taking the user directly to the question where the
     spike occurred.
            In the example provided, Figure 18.4 shows the question related to the spike
     shown in the problematic learning curve above. As you can see, the issue is caused
     by the third item in this set of questions that asks students to categorize X3 as a
     “collider” or a “non-collider.” We can try to understand where students specifically
     encountered an obstacle by further viewing a table from DataShop, as shown in
     Figure 18.5. It summarizes the answer options and the numbers of students who
     selected each as well as the feedback associated with each option.
            Upon further examination of the feedback for X3, as shown in Figure 18.6,
     there is mention about a “mediator,” which isn’t mentioned at all in the list of skills
     being analyzed. This observation could lead one to conclude that “identifying a col-
     lider” and “identifying a mediator” are potentially two different skills.
            A learning engineering data-driven decision from this analysis might be to de-
     fine a separate sub-skill “identify the mediator” as a separate knowledge component
     to be practiced and assessed. Practice problems for this separate skill would then be
     developed and included in the online course model.
            In this case, the course developers added “Identify the mediator” as a skill in
     the course and added practice questions for identifying mediators to the course as
     scaffolding toward mastery of the “categorize_var_on_path_as_collider_non_col-
     lider” skill. In the subsequent implementation of the course, the learning curve anal-
     yses for the “categorize_var_on_path_as_collider_non_collider” skill were found to
     be “good” learning curves, and the learning curve analyses related to the new skill
     “identify_mediators” also were found to be “good” learning curves.
            In another case, Carnegie Learning used learning curve analysis to discover
     ways that students think about solving linear equations. Their MATHia software
     teaches students to solve linear equations, including those of the form !"#$#% (such
     as &"#$#'). A learning curve shows that students make fewer errors as they gain ex-
     perience with such equations. But a close analysis of the learning curves may show
     “blips.” The blips may represent cases where equations that might seem similar to
     an expert are seen as different by students.
            For example, suppose the software gave students a set of equations that solve
     to an integer, such as ("#$#), &"#$#*(, +"#$#,, and so on. Students will likely get better
     at solving such equations, showing a learning curve where errors are reduced over
     time. If these students next encountered an equation that’s superficially similar but
                                                                         Data Analysis Tools | 377



 Evaluation    Number of    Answer                 Feedback/Classification
               Observations
 Correct       9 (81.82%)          <material>      <material>Correct. X1 is not a
                                   Non-Collider    collider because it only has one
                                   </material>     edge connected to it.</material>
 Incorrect     2 (18.18%)          <material>      <material>Incorrect. X1 cannot be a collider
                                   Collider        because X1 only has one edge connected
                                   </material>     to it. Remember, a variable is a collider
                                                   if two edges point into it.</material>
 Evaluation    Number of    Answer                 Feedback/Classification
               Observations
 Correct       4 (36.36%)          <material>      <material>Correct. X3 is not a collider
                                   Non-Collider    since it is a mediator, and all mediators
                                   </material>     are non-colliders.</material>
 Incorrect     7 (63.64%)          <material>      <material>Incorrect. X3 cannot be a collider
                                   Collider        since it is a mediator, and all mediators are
                                   </material>     non-colliders. Remember, a variable is a
                                                   collider if two edges point into it.</material>

FIGURE 18.5. Answers and student responses from the learning curve analysis
CC-BY Carnegie Mellon University
                                                  X1




                                                           X2




                                                  X3




                                                  X4

             Categorize each variable on the path X1→X2→X3→X4 as a
             collider or non-collider. Select collider or non-collider.
     !"##$%&'()*(+,(-"&(.(%"//+0$#(1$%.2,$(+&("-/3(4.,("-$($05$(%"--$%&$0(&"(+&'

     !"##$%&'()6(+,(-"&(.(%"//+0$#(,+-%$(+&(+,(.(7$0+.&"#8(.-0(.//(7$0+.&"#,(.#$(-"-9%"//+0$#,'

     :-%"##$%&'()A(%.--"&(1$(.(%"//+0$#(,+-%$(+&(+,(.(7$0+.&"#8(.-0(.//(7$0+.&"#,(.#$
     -"-9%"//+0$#,'(<$7$71$#8(.(=.#+.1/$(+,(.(%"//+0$#(+>(&?"($05$,(@"+-&(+-&"(+&'

     :-%"##$%&'();(%.--"&(1$(.(%"//+0$#(1$%.2,$();("-/3(4.,("-$($05$(%"--$%&$0(&"(+&'(
     <$7$71$#8(.(=.#+.1/$(+,(.(%"//+0$#(+>(&?"($05$,(@"+-&(+-&"(+&'

FIGURE 18.6. Viewing answer options and feedback as part of
learning curve analysis for instructional/assessment content
CC-BY from Carnegie Mellon University
378 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     whose answer isn’t an integer (such as ("#$#- or &"#$#,), the learning curve is likely
     to show an increase in the error rate for those equations. The reason is that students
     can solve an equation like ("#$#) by thinking “two times what number is six”? But
     few students can apply this thought process to an equation like ("#$#- (“two times
     what number is seven?”). In learning science terms, the knowledge required to solve
     !"#$#% equations where the answer is an integer doesn’t transfer to the case where
     the answer isn’t an integer. Paying attention to learning curves can reveal subtle
     ways that students think about problem solving.



     Endnotes
     1 CC-BY Jim Goodell and Steve Ritter. Informed by:
        • Glen, Stephanie. “Inference vs Prediction in One Picture.” Datasciencecentral, May 10, 2020.
          www.datasciencecentral.com/profiles/blogs/inference-vs-prediction-in-one-picture
        • Baker, Ryan S. Big Data and Education. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania,
          2020. www.upenn.edu/learninganalytics/MOOT/bigdataeducation.html
        • Fayyad, Usama, Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Padhraic Smyth. 1996. “From Data Mining
          to Knowledge Discovery in Databases.”AI Magazine 17, no. 3: 37–54. https://doi.org/10.1609/
          aimag.v17i3.1230
     2 Baker, Big Data and Education.
     3 Hubbard, Douglas W. How to Measure Anything: Finding the Value of Intangibles in Business.
       Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014.
     4 “Welcome to DataShop, the World’s Largest Repository of Learning Interaction Data.” LearnLab,
       the Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center. Last modified October 31, 2021. https://pslcdatashop.
       web.cmu.edu
     5 “LearnSphere: A Community Data Infrastructure to Support Learning Improvement Online.”
       Carnegie Mellon University, Last modified 2018. http://learnsphere.org
  VISION AND
COMMENTARY
A SHORT STORY ABOUT LEARNING ENGINEERS IN THE FUTURE
CHAPTER 19


The Future World
with Learning
Engineering: A Story
by Sae Schatz and JJ Walcutt



This chapter weaves together five stories from a not-too-distant future
where learning engineering has become the norm. This is a fictional
narrative of what might become—created for our shared insight and,
hopefully, enjoyment!


Imagine sometime in the future. Technology and globalization have driven disruptive
change across the world. The intelligence augmentation economy is in full swing,
and just like the industrial and service economies before it, this new paradigm has
fundamentally transformed the nature of work, life, and learning.
       Information has become ubiquitous. Jobs that once required specialized
subject-matter expertise are now being filled by less expert—but highly adaptable—
people augmented with high-performing intelligent agents. The value of lower-order
knowledge and skills has diminished, replaced by an increased emphasis on more
transcendent capabilities such as continuous learning, systems thinking, creativity,
distributed teamwork, and a breadth of knowledge literacy.
       Schools are no longer the primary gatekeepers of knowledge. Learning and
working happens anywhere and everywhere—in virtual and physical spaces and
across a shifting landscape of organizations, platforms, and social constructs. The
lines have blurred between education, training, working, and participating in society.
Words like “curriculum” and “teacher” have taken on different meanings, given the
range of autonomous, application-oriented, and adaptive learning approaches now
regularly used. Similarly, the purpose of primary and secondary schools has shifted
away from an outmoded information-centric model to one focused on preparing



DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-25
382 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     students for life-long learning, global citizenship, and human-machine collaboration.
     Schools try to help students develop a working familiarity of as many areas as
     possible, along with the mental models needed to connect concepts across disciplines,
     adeptly address novel challenges, navigate an interconnected information-dense
     environment, and participate as ethical contributors within society.
            Alternative forms of learning and development, including self-directed,
     experiential, and just-in-time learning in the flow of work have also become
     commonplace. Across this tapestry of experiences, individuals demonstrate their
     mastery through verified credentials aligned to competencies. Competencies have
     become a currency of sorts. They’re held in individuals’ digital wallets and used for
     a variety of learning and working purposes such as discovering relevant educational
     opportunities, connecting potential employees to employers, and evaluating
     organizational talent management needs.
            In this new world, global learning engineering teams work together with
     intelligent agents, communities of learners and other stakeholders, human and AI
     learning coaches, implementation teams, and big data analysts to co-create the
     tools and conditions for optimal life-long learning. This chapter follows the story
     of five team members from different functional domains and geographical regions
     as they collaborate on learning engineering tasks. These stories aren’t meant to
     comprehensively depict learning engineering in the future. They’re just one slice of
     life from one particular team that might someday exist.


                                            !!"
     Arun’s Story
     Arun looked up from his bank of monitors. Above them, he could see rain pelting
     his office window. Normally, it showed an impressive view of Bengaluru’s bustling
     National Highway 44, but today Arun could only see the gray smudges of an after-
     noon downpour. He sighed and turned back to his work. It was nearly 5 p.m., but the
     thought of commuting home in that weather slowed his feet. Well, he thought, may
     as well stay a bit later and hope for a break in the storm.
            Arun worked in the analysis division at Chakrabarti-Dhav Infotek. His team
     specifically focused on global trends and insights reporting. Businesses paid good
     money for their forecasts. The finance and entertainment reports were most popular,
     but their reports on emerging learning and development targets also had a dedicated
     following. Years ago he would have expected only schools and universities to be
                       The Future World with Learning Engineering: A Story | 383



interested, but in this age of life-long learning, businesses and NGOs accounted for
the report’s largest customer base.
       A dialog box on Arun’s console was flashing, bringing his attention back to
the screen. The blinking indicator meant the data reduction algorithm had finished
processing. He’d planned to finish his data wrangling work tomorrow, but with the
weather looking like a monsoon outside, he may as well handle it now.
       Arun clicked the confirmation button to proceed, and a visualization filled his
screen. On the left, ranked-ordered lists of popular topics appeared. Icons next to
each item showed the topic’s popularity over time along with a summary of the typ-
ical sentiment felt toward it. On the dashboard’s right side, a world map glowed with
colorful overlays illustrating regional differences, and with a few clicks, he could
explore other filters, like demographic or temporal overlays.
       Arun moved his cursor down the list as he reviewed it. Immediately, his eye
was drawn to the line, “First successful Mars walk.” Like many around the world,
Arun was captivated by the inaugural human spaceflight to Mars. He’d followed
the astronauts’ vlog and had tuned into the live (or, rather, three and a half hours
delayed) stream of the crew’s first steps on the red planet. The world’s interest in
the Martian mission wasn’t surprising, although he hadn’t expected the topic to be
trending so vigorously after this many weeks. He clicked through to examine it
in more detail. Its emotionality quotient looked good—broadly positive and with a
moderately high excitement level across demographic groups. This trend seemed to
have across-the-board staying power. Closing out that dialog box, Arun confirmed
the trend’s inclusion, formally adding it to his report.
       Returning to the master list, Arun clicked through several more items,
reprioritizing or eliminating entries all together—like the new K-pop sensation
W1$H Girls Magic. Among certain demographics, that K-pop band was far and
away the most popular trend, but its sentiment was all wrong for this particular
report. The emotionality magnitude was running near the ceiling, and Arun knew
from experience that pop-culture fads with that sentiment profile tended to create
distractions rather than hooks when it came to instructional settings.
       After finishing the popular trends list, Arun turned to the scholarly trends
window. The algorithm sifted through the previous month’s academic publications
to create a summary of the most popular topics, latest breakthroughs, or leading
indicators of new science and engineering findings. He brought up a different view,
a dashboard showing a dense network diagram with clusters of interconnected dots
representing the relationships and frequencies of different topics. Working with his
AI decision-support bot, Arun sorted through the trends, adding the most relevant
384 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     ones to this month’s report and culling those he deemed less viable.
            A couple of hours later, Arun was done. He’d sorted through the popular and
     scholarly trends and was ready to add the crowdsourced Experts Pool™ opinions, a
     unique selling point his company offered. The expert panel for this report included a
     group of verified learning engineers who’d had the opportunity to review and com-
     ment on trends using Delphi-style techniques and a private (human-with-AI mod-
     erated) online discussion board. They received full access to the trends data at no
     cost, and in turn, Chakrabarti-Dhav Infotek benefited from their human-centered,
     context-specific, and data-informed practices and expertise.
            But the real secret sauce in the Experts Pool™ came from the company’s
     integrated testing platform. Thousands of end-user learners received early access
     to the (sometimes experimental) learning experiences built from the report, and in
     return they shared their own backgrounds and experiences. Using natural language
     processing, Chakrabarti-Dhav Infotek was able to ingest their comments and use data-
     mining algorithms to uncover learner-centric insights. In recent years, the company
     had even established a dedicated user-testing and participatory design division based
     on this capability, and now that division supported learning engineering teams from
     around the world in A/B testing and iterative curriculum development.
            Arun spent another hour scrolling through the experts’ commentary online,
     while checking the summaries and recommendations supplied by the corresponding
     AI filtering app with the integrated end-user model. As he reviewed the material,
     Arun continued to nudge the parameters, causing his AI assistant to optimize the
     master trends list until it was up to Arun’s standard. By incorporating the expert
     and learner opinions, along with AI-supported learning engineers like Arun,
     Chakrabarti-Dhav Infotek Learning and Development (L&D) Trends Targets Report
     was nearly 15 percent more accurate than their next successful competitor.
            Human-algorithm teams for the win, Arun mused.
            Outside, the sky had darkened from pale gray to a deep coal black. Night had
     fallen, and the rain hadn’t slacked. Arun rang for a runner to bring him some food as
     he settled in for a long night. No use in stopping now, he thought. If I get the report
     packaged tonight, then I can just take tomorrow off.
            As the last step, Arun checked the information quality of the aggregate list.
     The AI agent had already applied the Mägi-Yang filter, an algorithm named after
     two AI researchers who’d won a Turing Award for their work—their Trust DApp
     algorithm. It used a combination of explainable neural networks and distributed led-
     gers to provide a reliable estimation of an information source’s validity and bias. It
     worked best when the source data came from stable organizations or people with
                       The Future World with Learning Engineering: A Story | 385



patterns of trusted micro-transitions over time. It also worked well on high-volume
data sets, like the one Arun was working with. The M-Y Trust DApp flagged several
trends as possible sources of misinformation, incomplete, or misleading materials.
Arun reviewed each warning, particularly the high-risk items. He also published the
risk-by-topic list to the expert discussion board for their future feedback.
       Like the information sources themselves, each of the reviewers in the Experts
Pool™ also developed Trust Factors over time, based on the fairness and accuracy
of their contributions to the group. Arun couldn’t have mentally kept up with the
different layers of reliability across topics, sources, and individual peer reviewers.
Fortunately, the system calculated those weights for him, and the result was that his
company’s L&D Trends Targets Report was regarded as one of the most valid and
reliable publications in its sector.
       Finally, the data set was nearly complete. Arun double-checked its metadata.
His software automatically tagged the package with the standard digital signatures—
date, time, contributor codes, and so on. This included identifiers for the contributing
algorithms, along with the aggregate MYTCO score (the Mägi-Yang Trust
Coefficient) for the package. The metadata also included machine-readable pointers
to the original data sources to show the lineage of the information used in the report,
and it had human-readable tags for the topics included in the data set. These topical
tags, like “astrophysics” or “game studies,” referenced the Worldwide Wikiword, a
community-maintained linked data set for disambiguating terms. Over time, Arun
had discovered that he always needed to check those tags; invariably, he’d find one
that was off. And it was just that case today. He chuckled to himself as he fixed the
link to “Mars” away from “a caramel and nougat candy bar” to “fourth planet from
the sun.” It was times like this when Arun was reminded that he would always have
a job, no matter how sophisticated his AI teammates became.
       Finally finished, Arun pressed “publish,” and smiled as the processing bar ap-
peared on his screen. Pleased with his long day of work, Arun stretched and turned
off his monitor. Outside, the rain had slowed, and miraculously, traffic on the NH-44
was light. He’d be able to make it home in half an hour—and he’d finished his work
for the rest of the week too. It had been a good day.


                                        !""
Dahlia’s Story
Dahlia nodded politely at her colleagues as she passed them in the hall. In one hand,
386 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     she carried a steaming espresso, and in her other, she clutched her bulky coat. Dahlia
     always struggled this time of year, when the sun didn’t rise until late in the morning.
     Blearily, she found her desk, situated near a window that looked onto one of Helsin-
     ki’s many cobblestone streets.
            Dahlia settled in, turning on her monitor and donning the oversized noise-
     canceling headphones she preferred. Her console came to life, and she logged in.
     Taking a sip from her mug, she clicked the icon for her Command Station app. It
     aggregated her work-related feeds into a single dashboard, including her email,
     assigned tasks, file update notifications, and filtered newsfeeds. Dahlia immediately
     noticed her team’s thread for the national curriculum project. It showed several
     new file commits. Presumably, that meant they’d met yesterday’s milestone gates.
     The project was the company’s largest and most important contract, financed by
     the Finnish National Agency for Education. The curriculum focused on adaptive,
     mixed-mode skills development in a collaborative problem-solving context that
     required students to demonstrate cross-domain knowledge literacy. Before she could
     explore the updates more fully, though, a priority alert caught her attention. One of
     her automatic reminders had flagged “L&D Trends Targets Report update” at the
     top of her daily checklist. Clicking the alert launched a visualization app where she
     could explore the latest L&D Trends Targets data set.
            Dahlia worked at a learning technology—or LTech—firm, one of several sim-
     ilar businesses in that burgeoning sector. Her own company was relatively small,
     just a few dozen employees. They balanced their size with a reputation for product
     excellence and through a network of worldwide partners, including the analytics
     firm Chakrabarti-Dhav Infotek, who’d produced this trends report. Through such
     partnerships, the learning engineering team for any given product effectively includ-
     ed members from multiple companies, backgrounds, and capability areas.
            A few parts of the report immediately stood out to Dahlia. The excitement of
     the Mars mission continued to be high across all demographics. That was good. The
     national curriculum project team had already integrated those themes into several
     prototype lessons that were being evaluated through Chakrabarti-Dhav Infotek’s
     user-testing platform, and she was pleased to see interest in the topic wasn’t waning.
     Dahlia also noted some developing topics in bioengineering, health sciences,
     corporate finance, and popular arts. The forthcoming release of the e-Mersion 360°,
     the next-generation consumer-grade VR platform with high-fidelity onboard haptics
     and proprioception sensors, also topped the list. People were calling it “gadget of the
     year” and the “herald of a new reality.” Whether that hype panned out, the system’s
     popularity had catalyzed substantial interest in new media creation, and as a result,
                       The Future World with Learning Engineering: A Story | 387



experiential immersive design had re-emerged as a hot topic. That was particularly
great for Dahlia, because she could easily add elements of new media design into
nearly every curricular package she created.
        Dahlia specialized in designing packages for problem-based learning, or PBL
for short, that integrated multiple topics from across different competency areas. For
instance, her most recent deliverable bundled sustainable agriculture, introduction to
the scientific method, public policy, and personal health into a package for secondary
schools. Dahlia also had several L&D projects under contract for business-to-
business (B2B) clients. Although they generally focused on workforce development,
they still used PBL and other pedagogical approaches similar to the modules she
built for schools and universities. Remembering this, Dahlia selected some of the
demographic filters on her visualization app, examining the latest employee up-
skilling developments in the L&D Trends Targets Report.
       The right-to-repair movement had become popular across the commercial
sector, and today, it was becoming common for large businesses to train their em-
ployees in basic maintenance skills. With that foundation, employees—assisted by
their AI agents—could fix just about anything. Several industry reports showed that
“troubleshooting literacy” helped businesses sustain software and equipment lon-
ger, and it increased productivity by shortening downtimes. As a result, just-in-time
learning modules on various repair topics were flying off the digital shelves, and the
PBL packages Dahlia designed were also popular. Her introductory modules helped
workers build basic troubleshooting competences, creating a baseline that let them
more effectively use the specific just-in-time packages when they needed them.
       The firm where Dahlia worked, Oivallus, also had a team focused on micro-
learning curation. Of course, since the mid-2020s, microlearning businesses had be-
come a dime a dozen. Anyone could search the web for whatever topic they wanted
and find hundreds of automated websites offering microlearning “courses.” In prac-
tice, typically, these were just strings of automatically assembled multimedia with
computer-generated quizzes tacked on. Initially hailed as a revolution in learning,
these microlearning aggregators had soon become jumbles of noisy content.
       Development of the MYTCO score helped. As its use grew in popularity,
it helped individuals find the most trustworthy resources. But just because an
instructional video or how-to guide isn’t biased or misleading, doesn’t mean it’s
pedagogically sound or appropriate for all contexts. As a result, in the old days of
crowdsourced microlearning, too many of these Frankenstein just-in-time-training
packages were created. And even though they included all of the de facto concepts,
the pieces were often too difficult to follow—like reading a book where different
388 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     authors wrote each page without consulting with one another. This was especially
     problematic for schools developing knowledge literacies, which require coherent
     learning experiences—particularly at the introductory stages. And after several
     large-scale state-sponsored studies, it became clear that the low-effort microlearning
     platforms weren’t really effective, at least from a learning outcomes perspective.
            That’s how Oivallus got its start. Their first successful product was a micro-
     learning curation service that used human-supervised AI to verify and tag instructional
     resources with contextual relevance and pedagogical metrics, making it possible for
     both educational software and human teachers to assemble and sequence the content
     into semantically coherent curricular arcs. The algorithm Oivallus developed also
     automatically identified topical, contextual, and pedagogical similarity so that
     assembled strings of learning resources would function as integrated lessons rather
     than disjoint factoids.
            Oivallus soon evolved from a software-centric startup to a learning engineering
     firm. They hired learning designers, including Dahlia, and found their niche in the
     intersection of applied AI and learning theory. Dahlia specialized in cognition and
     education. She worked closely with her more tech-savvy coworkers, and she relied
     on data sets, such as the L&D Trends Targets Report, and advanced software, like the
     Chakrabarti-Dhav Infotek user-testing and participatory design platform. With these
     tools, combined with iterative cycles of testing and analysis, Dahlia and her fellow
     Oivallus learning engineers were able to substantially enhance the effectiveness of
     the learning experiences they created, even across different contexts and for diverse
     learner populations.
            It was time for Dahlia to get to work. She opened her latest assignment, a
     vocational project called Practical Piping, contracted by an industry group. It focused
     on new smart plumbing technologies. (Who knew that was a thing? Dahlia mused.)
     The learning engineering challenge this time was to train an entire industry on a
     brand-new plumbing technology. The project also incorporated several twenty-first
     century competencies, specifically metacognition and self-directed connectivism
     skills, and it included practical exercises organized around a space exploration
     theme. Oivallus had been getting mileage out of the popularity of that Mars mission!
            Several hours passed. Dahlia lost herself in her work, until she was interrupted
     by a gentle tapping on her desk. Elliot stood there, with two other coworkers loitering
     expectantly near the door. They were heading down the café for a midmorning
     coffee. Already?! The morning had been a blur! she thought. With a start, Dahlia
     checked the time. It was already ten o’clock. That meant the workday would be
     ending soon in Singapore. Declining her team’s invitation, she instead logged into
                       The Future World with Learning Engineering: A Story | 389



the extranet chat and found her Pac-World Informatica contact. After a few polite
texts to confirm the call, Dahlia joined a video-teleconference with Ehuang, her
performance analytics point of contact.
       Ehuang was a wiz at data science, and even better, she made the technobabble
intelligible.
       “This latest package we’re making,” Dahlia began.
       “The plumbing one . . . ?”
       “Yes, Practical Piping for Plumbing Professionals,” Dahlia smiled at the
ostentatious module name. “It’s almost done, but I need to add in the instrumentation
data hooks you created.”
       The company where Ehuang worked, a massive analytics firm based in the
heart of Singapore’s tech sector, had an agreement with Oivallus to collect and analyze
data on the performance of its learning products. Every module Oivallus created
included—what Ehuang called—paradata. It provided general inference tracking
based on the module’s access, use, and ratings. The higher-end products, like the
PBL packages Dahlia designed, also included tailored impact metrics that tied into
Pac-World Informatica’s global network of data systems. These additional measures
went over and above the learning effectiveness evaluations that Dahlia included in
the curriculum. For example, Ehuang explained how some of the measures were
included in the current package to tease out the profitability impacts of the training.
       Dahlia always found it difficult to envision how such distal impacts could be
correlated with specific interventions, like a single training program, but the special-
ists at Pac-World Informatica were masters of that kind of big data analysis as well
as the instrumentation that made it possible. Ehuang would sometimes joke that their
secret was “data farming” instead of “data mining.”
       “You have to plant the data seeds if you want the data fruits, lah!”
       Over the next hour, Ehuang walked Dahlia through the package that Pac-
World Informatica had sent over for the new plumbing curriculum. By the time their
call ended, Dahlia was ready to do the project’s pre-flight review.
       The Practical Piping curriculum covered a set of three primary and five
secondary competencies. It included three interrelated PBL activities (with the
embedded impact measures from Ehuang) as well as integrated formative and
summative assessments and AI-enabled student, mentor, and evaluator guidance,
such as scaffolding recommendations, just-in-time nudges, and feedback templates.
The package also included alternative pedagogical recommendations, adaptation
pathways, and different presentation modes depending on whether it was used in a
formal learning context (like a vo-tech school), a technology-aided blended one, or
390 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     a self-directed learning situation.
            Once the files were packaged, Dahlia clicked the “pre-flight check” button.
     Her mouse icon became a spinning animation, indicating the system was processing,
     and a few moments later, a dialog window appeared with a list of errors and warn-
     ings about the curriculum package. Dahlia reviewed them, accepting or fixing each
     as appropriate. Once satisfied, Dahlia clicked “approve” and then committed the
     Practical Piping package to her team’s repository. Elliot would do the final quality
     control on it—including the crowdsourced user-testing facilitated by their partner
     Chakrabarti-Dhav Infotek—and then he’d send it off for the customer’s review. Once
     they gave the greenlight, it would be disseminated across their partner organizations
     and vocational schools.
            Dahlia smiled. That was one task done for the day. After lunch, she thought,
     I’ll review the team’s update on our national curriculum project.


                                              !#"
     Dominic’s Story
     Dominic tugged at his collar. He hated wearing a tie, especially when it was so hot
     out. It was nearly winter, but Austin still felt like a sauna. He fidgeted unconsciously.
     Normally, his in-office days at the CrownSoft Learning Systems Corporate HQ were
     the highlight of his workweek. He looked forward to the breakout groups and good-
     natured camaraderie among the Scrum teams—and the less formal dress code. But
     today wasn’t business as usual; instead, Dominic was leading a special in-progress
     review with their important (VIP) clients from the Faang Academy.
             He checked his watch again. Logically, he knew there was plenty of time,
     but these VIP ceremonies always made him inexplicably nervous. He took a breath
     and closed his eyes. Dominic considered his day; walking through his mental to-
     do list helped settle his jitters. First, he’d check in with Marko and Liz to make
     sure they were ready to show off the new content streaming server. It leveraged
     widespread interoperability standards to enable CrownSoft’s curricular packages to
     flow seamlessly across different learning platforms, whether web browsers, mixed
     reality gear, pedagogical assistance apps, or some other emerging tech. CrownSoft
     had effectively abstracted the content from the hardware and software, a major coup
     in terms of efficiency and flexibility.
             Next, he’d talk with Imani about her adaptive VR demo. CrownSoft had
     scored pre-release copies of the new e-Mersion 360° system, and Imani’s team had
                       The Future World with Learning Engineering: A Story | 391



wasted no time assembling an adaptive learning module for it. The lesson was built
on a PBL package they’d gotten from their Finnish vendor. Dominic had tested it
last week. And what a marvel! The system transported him to different “locations”
around the world where he could work with people from other countries on problem-
solving challenges, and it doled out in-game rewards for his actions. It had felt like
a game and a vacation all at once, and beyond that enjoyment, he’d also picked up a
new appreciation for cross-cultural skills and international affairs.




Later that morning, Dominic found himself in the CrownSoft development team
conference room. He’d completed his to-do list hours before, and Mackenzie, the
team’s project coordinator, had the meeting logistics well in hand. She was just
connecting the video feed to their colleagues in Helsinki when the VIP customers
arrived. Through the etched-glass walls of the conference room, Dominic could see
them in the atrium. He waved, and Kevin Tanaka made a friendly gesture in reply,
as he and his companions turned toward the meeting room.
       Mr. Tanaka was one of the executives at the Faang Academy, a private nonprofit
school system that had spun out of a Silicon Valley conglomerate. The Academy
began as a postsecondary vocational program, a bridge meant to prepare prospective
workers to fill the high-tech roles those companies needed. Soon it expanded into
a magnet school for secondary students. Over time, it grew even more: adding
adult education for ongoing workforce development and incorporating younger and
younger preparation programs. Eventually, the Academy became a fully integrated
learning pipeline, stretching from primary school to workforce development. It also
built public-private partnerships, and in coordination with government programs,
was soon recognized as the first public-private K-to-Gray (kindergarten through
life) school system.
       The Academy’s success could be attributed, at least in part, to its adoption of
learning engineering principles. From its first days, the Academy focused on high-
yield learning approaches. It championed proven learning science theories, employed
iterative human-centered engineering design methodologies, and verified their
impacts through ongoing performance assessments. Using the wealth of data science
knowledge its parent companies had refined through e-commerce or digital media,
the Academy also incorporated advanced learning analytics and constantly improved
its offerings through experimentation and A/B testing. They also leveraged those
data to support highly adaptive learning—what the Academy touted as educational
392 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     “mass customization,” a term borrowed from its commercial roots. Regardless of
     the nomenclature, the results were powerful. Academy programs showed effect sizes
     over 3.0, as compared to more traditional educational offerings.1
            What’s more, because the Academy began as a vocational program, it hadn’t
     been constrained by the classic template of a multiyear degree. Instead, individual
     learners could identify the jobs or tasks they wanted to accomplish, then complete
     curricular blocks to build those competencies and earn associated microcredentials
     along the way. Over time, as the Academy expanded into K-12 educational offerings,
     including foundational requirements such as algebra, English, and a broad range of
     cross-domain knowledge literacy competencies.
            Across sectors, Faang’s competency-based approach untethered education and
     training from the time-in-seat model. It was also a key factor in personalizing each
     person’s learning trajectory, making the Academy widely popular—from individuals
     and parents to companies and communities.




     “ . . . and with these inference engines, we fuse the different assessment pieces and
     parts to give us the holistic profile for the learner,” Elliot Mäkinen was explain-
     ing through the video conference. The meeting was well into its third hour, albeit
     with a lunch break in the middle where Mackenzie had served up platters of street
     tacos—much to the delight of their out-of-town clients. Bellies sated and in high
     spirits after the morning’s successful tech demos, the second phase of the meeting
     was progressing steadily. It featured CrownSoft’s data engineering team and their
     partners at Oivallus, a boutique Finnish company expert in cognition and learning
     with advanced technologies.
              This discussion was the main feature of the meeting, and despite himself,
     Dominic felt that familiar nervous energy creeping into his mind. For reassurance,
     he glanced at Mr. Tanaka, sitting at the head of the table. The VIP client was deep
     in discussion with Elliot and seemed genuinely absorbed in the conversation. In his
     earlier days, Mr. Tanaka had been an accomplished software engineer, and Dominic
     could tell the older man still enjoyed diving into the technical details. That was good.
     It boded well for this part of the meeting where Dominic’s team planned to unveil the
     beta release of their Autodex 3.0 software.
              Autodex had become the industry leader for 3E records—those digital
     wallets that individuals and organizations use to store, validate, and exchange data
     on their education, employment, and experience (the so-called 3Es). Autodex used
                       The Future World with Learning Engineering: A Story | 393



distributed ledger technologies and standards-based interfaces to create a secure
and trustworthy data exchange system. By a large margin, Autodex was the most
popular application for this, but it wasn’t the only app available. The data feeding
into the Autodex was considered a public utility, so anyone could (theoretically)
build applications and data exchanges on top of that stream. Several different 3E
exchanges, sort of like different credit card companies and credit monitoring bureaus,
were popular across the learning and development sector, and associated application
programming interfaces (APIs) were standard on most devices.
       Dominic’s thoughts refocused as Mackenzie made a drum-rolling sound on the
conference table. “And now, ladies and gentlemen,” she said with a verbal flourish,
“the thing you’ve all been waiting for: It’s time for Dominic Morales to truly geek-
out over data.” A couple of the clients smiled, and Mr. Tanaka looked eager. Dominic
got to his feet and gestured at the oversized display screen. On it, a video of the new
Autodex upgrade had begun to play.
       “Thanks, Mac, for that . . . flattering introduction.” Dominic said with
good-natured sarcasm. “And thanks to Elliot and our friends at Oivallus. With their
latest set of composite assessments, we’re getting a remarkable level of validity from
today’s L&D performance data. We’re up to 92 percent reliability for identifying
someone’s digital signature, just from their routine clickstream interactions. That’s
almost eliminated K-16 cheating in Faang schools and apps. Also, the results of
last quarter’s testing in the Midwest vo-tech sector found a better than 80 percent
correlation—consistently—between assessments embedded in our curriculum and
downstream training transfer tasks.”
       The clients nodded politely. No doubt, they’d heard these statistics before. He
was simply leading up to the big reveal, so Dominic continued.
       “These are all incremental improvements. Important, meat-and-potatoes im-
provements, but not really new, you know? Schools and students have come to ex-
pect that level of rigor with our products. So where are their pain points?”
       The video playing on the conference screen shifted to a set of graphs showing
the results of CrownSoft’s most recent consumer studies. Dominic touched the first
graph, and it expanded to fill the monitor.
       “For the third year in a row, businesses want more consumer confidence. A
lot of workplaces are still hesitant to cut the cord. They’re requiring applicants and
workers to use an Autodex app, but still verifying personnel through legacy, manual
means. This is a particular problem in these two factors, here.” Dominic pointed.
“First, third-party credentials. Although Faang Academy and a lot of other classic
school systems have good name-recognition, which has built trust in our programs,
394 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     our smaller partners don’t benefit from that celebrity status.”
            “And institutional name-recognition isn’t a pedagogical technique!” Dahlia
     quipped from the video feed, as she and Dominic had practiced in advance.
            “The other issue,” Dominic continued after pausing for some polite chuckling,
     “is the public competency sets Autodex uses.” The Autodex software, like the soft-
     ware used by their industry competitors, leveraged open ontologies that were created
     from common definitions of competencies, accessible via linked data from APIs.
            “The governance process for those public data sets is slow. And I mean
     sloooow—like Austin traffic before a three-day weekend. Which means we’re
     starting out with stale or incomplete competency data. It’s no surprise our consumers
     are skeptical of it. But we’ve fixed both of those issues in the latest Autodex release.
     Here’s how . . . ”
            Dominic then launched into his well-rehearsed summary of the new features
     meant to improve consumer trust in the system’s outputs. He walked through its
     updated data-lineage tagging and multitiered trust algorithms, along with the new
     user-experience features meant to better convey those trust quotients to end users.
     He also highlighted a new human-AI filtering algorithm meant to improve the cur-
     rency and reliability of baseline competency data.
            “We expect these enhancements to appeal to our employer end users and to
     help smaller schools or EdTech businesses. But what about individuals—the students
     and employees? We surveyed them too, and pretty universally, they want better self-
     directed learning.”
            Dahlia chimed in on cue. “Schools and businesses want this feature too. Schools
     are always eager to supplement their formal curriculum, and employers want their
     workforces up-skilled to the latest knowledge and skills. Meanwhile, individuals
     have a whole spectrum of reasons for wanting to learn.” Remotely, Dahlia clicked
     through to the next graph as she described the different archetypes of self-directed
     learners.
            “On the surface,” Dahlia continued as she advanced the presentation to a
     new screen, “it seems like our main challenges are identification (of the desired
     competencies), access (on the right platform), and motivation (to make the activity
     intrinsically or extrinsically appealing). These are all real issues, but there’s another
     factor: Learning skill—how effectively a student can teach themselves.”
            “The new algorithms in Autodex 3.0 include user-support for . . . ” Dominic
     fumbled at the word and checked his notes, while Dahlia chimed in to help.
            “ . . . for metacognitive support. Formally, we call it self-regulated learning
     scaffolding.”
                       The Future World with Learning Engineering: A Story | 395



       “Yeah, thanks! Dahlia’s talking about our new embedded pedagogical assis-
tance algorithm. At CrownSoft, we’ve just been calling it ‘Mentor in a Box.’”
       The meeting continued on for a couple more hours, broken up by demos and
coffee breaks. By the end of the day, Dominic felt exhausted but accomplished. He’d
rather spend twelve hours coding than half a day in meetings. But it had been worth
it. Mr. Tanaka and his team loved the new immersive learning modules, and they
seemed to appreciate the Autodex 3.0 upgrades. In fact, Mr. Tanaka had already
scheduled time for Dominic to brief the Faang Chief Learning Officer Council so
they could begin planning its roll-out.
       Ugh, another corporate meeting, Dominic mused. Well, I suppose that’s just
the price of success!


                                        !$"
Ishimwe’s Story
Ishimwe squinted at the midday sun beating down on her and the small group fol-
lowing behind her. She was leading them on a tour of the new Icyizere Hybrid School
campus in Rwanda’s Ngoma District. They were a curious sight strolling along the
town’s red-clay streets, each wearing business attire topped with fluorescent safety
vests and hardhats. Ishimwe paused and gestured to a half-constructed building.
       “This will be one of the multipurpose seminar buildings, and it’s one of the
hubs in the sensor network we discussed.”
       “Is this another community-built structure?” Shema Mugisha asked. The
white-haired man walked with a cane, and he was the most elderly representative
on the board of advisors. Despite the heat, he wore a button-up shirt and black suit
jacket, adorned with a silver pin from his favorite philanthropy. It reflected the light
like a miniature sun on his lapel.
       “Yes!” Ishimwe replied. “Through our program, we supply the autonomous
construction system that essentially prints the components, but we work closely with
the community to assemble the actual buildings and design the campus layout. We
also supply the smart sensors, so that the campus and portions of the city can be
added to the IoT network. But again, we work with the community to design the
specific features of each network. That means each region implements a different
version of it.”
       “Most of the sensors are self-powered, a majority through solar energy here
in Ngoma, and their connectivity is almost entirely wireless,” Ishimwe continued,
396 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     as she carefully stepped over a bundle of newly unfurled cables stretched out on the
     ground. “But we’re also installing some high-performance structured cabling under
     the campus.”
            “Come, let me show you one of the completed seminar buildings, and we can
     see how the citywide sensors are supporting educational outreach.” Ishimwe led the
     group to one of the nearby buildings.
            Inside, much-needed shade and water bottles awaited. The group sat down at
     a table, which had been arranged for them in a partially completed classroom. All
     around, electrical wires and monitor mounts hung from bare walls, clearly awaiting
     the addition of video screens and other technologies. Ishimwe continued chatting
     with the board members, and after a few minutes, she described the various tech-
     nologies that would soon be installed in the educational space. She also highlighted
     the back-end technology, including the underlying data fabric that would connect the
     various learning applications into an interoperable, holistic system of systems—a
     learning ecosystem. That ecosystem could incorporate a range of technologies, from
     common computers to mixed reality devices, mobile learning tools, and even em-
     bedded sensors. Together, these interoperable delivery platforms created flexibility,
     and they offered learners many different learning pathways, depending on their
     unique needs.
            She continued, “We’ve found it’s important to situate learning within the real
     lives of the students. For example, in this region, there’s still a lot of traditional
     agriculture, and we use that in some lessons. The district-wide sensor grid monitors
     weather conditions, and then we use those data in modules related to climate,
     weather, and even students’ own farming projects.”
            “This goes both ways too. We can bring the outside data into structured
     lessons, making those lessons more relevant to students. Conversely, we can take
     lessons out into the students’ world. Thanks to our network upgrades, students have
     6G connections anywhere in the district.”
            Ishimwe pulled a pair of augmented reality glasses from her bag and then
     showed how their embedded location sensors and computer vision could help situate
     lessons. She loaded a postsecondary biology module that her group had recently
     acquired from CrownSoft Learning Systems. Then, using the software’s developer
     mode to spoof some of the context data, she showed how the glasses could detect
     different animals and plants, such as the slightly wilted eucalyptus leaf she produced
     for demonstration purposes. Once detected, the glasses could deliver anatomy or
     phytotomy in microlessons that were overlaid in the wearer’s audio and visual
     channels. The software came as a part of a gamified package. It encouraged students
                       The Future World with Learning Engineering: A Story | 397



to earn points by seeking out different species and then proving their biological
knowledge of them. Microlessons in the package also accounted for the local
environment, for example, incorporating geo-specific modules on invasive species
if students happen to find non-native flora at a particular location.
       The board of advisors seemed impressed, and their appreciation grew as
Ishimwe reviewed the financial details. The ruggedized AR hardware had become
cost-effective enough to provide up to two pairs for every student covered by their
program.
       “That’s all quite good,” Shema Mugisha said slowly. “You’ve made great prog-
ress in expanding educational access. You should be proud of this work, Doctor Ma-
horo,” the elderly man continued, using Ishimwe’s surname. “But I still worry about
the digital education divide. Yes, we’re rapidly closing the access gap, but I have
seen many educational programs and many, many new educational tools. So, I know!
I know there is more to the divide than technology. Simply increasing access to com-
puters, networks, and”—he gestured toward the glasses—“other gadgets, that is not
enough. Technology, alone, is not learning, and information, alone, is not education.”
       Ishimwe nodded and began to reply, but Mugisha kept talking over her. Clear-
ly, he’d been mulling over this point for some time, and it was bursting to escape.
       “I am no Luddite. I see the potential, but we need to also ensure the lessons are
well made and well curated. We need semantic coherence in our curricula. All of the
individual pieces need to come together so that they create quality learning. It is our
job to produce students who have knowledge and learning literacy, who can think,
and who can transfer that foundational knowledge out into the world. Ultimately, I
worry about the hidden digital divide. I worry that some students will have unequal
access to coherent and high-quality educational curricula—even as they get access
to new electronics and libraries worth of information.” Mugisha continued on his
soapbox a bit longer, even referencing some graphs he’d prepared on his tablet.
       “Mwami Mugisha,” Ishimwe finally interjected, using the loquacious man’s
honorific title. “Thank you for your concern. It’s clear you understand the depths
of the challenge we face. I can assure you that we’ve learned from the past. Today’s
modernization efforts extend beyond a mere moment in time.”
       Mugisha nodded for Ishimwe to explain.
       “One of the keys to our success is community outreach. We don’t simply ar-
rive with premade solutions from Kigali, Addis Ababa, or Geneva. The first phase of
any development project starts months before even a single meter of dirt is moved.
We work hand-in-hand with the local teachers and leaders. It’s a human-centered
design process. Together, we identify their city’s needs and tailor the curriculum,
398 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     technology grid, and construction to them. We also take special care to find com-
     munity groups, like the Zaza Women’s Center, so that we can make sure different
     voices are heard.”
            “Especially, we collaborate closely with educational professionals. For
     example, here in Ngoma, we’ve just completed the third cohort of teacher training.
     The training helps them learn to use new educational technologies, including the
     assistive AI coaches and all of the associated pedagogies,” Ishimwe explained with
     a pointed tilt of her head toward Mugisha. “Once these systems reach an initial
     operational capacity, we leave a smaller team behind. They continue working with
     the community and maturing their processes iteratively. They also collect efficacy
     data, like what you’re looking at here in the presentation.”
            Mugisha smiled. “Our investors from the World Bank and United Nations will
     be pleased.”
            “Yes, agreed . . . ” another member of the board, Adola Abdullahi, interjected,
     her tone implying a forthcoming “but” at the end of her words. The shrewd business-
     woman continued, “But what about the ‘private’ side of our public-private partner-
     ship? We can all agree that expanding educational access is admirable, but we also
     need to consider our private sector investors. Doctor Mahoro, would you talk to us
     about the business case?”
            “If you’ll turn to page twelve on your tablet,” Ishimwe responded, “you’ll
     see initial results from our newest commercialization initiative, called the Pathways
     Network. It’s still early, but we’ve established a network of schools and businesses
     that create sponsored educational opportunities as well as a business pipeline for
     both employers and students (or, as we like to say, ‘future employees’).”
            “This says businesses have access to freemium subscriptions?” Abdullahi
     questioned as she examined the presentation on her tablet.
            “That’s correct. Businesses or business groups, like the International Cham-
     ber of Commerce, purchase licenses to join Pathways. Among other things, those
     subscriptions give them unique access to certified talent in places like rural Ngoma.
     This gives businesses the high-quality employees they desperately need and at a
     competitive rate in the global context.”
            “But what does freemium mean, here?”
            “The license costs are on a sliding scale, depending on the other contribu-
     tions an organization provides. For instance, some businesses sign up for our mentor
     program. They dedicate a set number of expert hours for group teaching and indi-
     vidual coaching. This actually serves our needs just as well as, if not better than,
     financial payments. It gives our students access to professionals who can help them
                       The Future World with Learning Engineering: A Story | 399



understand how different lessons translate to workplace settings. And, as Mwami
Mugisha will appreciate, the small-group sessions and personal mentorship prove
extraordinarily valuable to the students. This is just one example. Businesses can
contribute in several other ways, and ultimately, those that choose a full level of
commitment pay nothing for their Pathways membership, at least monetarily.”
       “You said ‘high-quality employees,’” Eric Kubwimana, one of the newest ad-
visory board members, noted. “How are you determining that?”
       “One of the options is to participate in our validation and accreditation pro-
gram. Members assist with continuous content reviews and certifications as well as
some individual assessments and credentialing work.”
       “The NGOs also support those programs,” the venerable Mugisha observed.
       “Can you tell us more about this?” Abdullahi asked, pointing at a new page
on her table. Ishimwe noted where the woman was looking and then launched into
another topic.
       “You mean our AI-recommender system. It’s the cornerstone of our learning
ecosystem. It accounts for a variety of factors, from individuals’ personal profiles in
their Autodex to their physical context, teacher and mentor suggestions, and even the
time of day or local weather. Students can access their personalized recommendations
through an interface on either their AR glasses or personal computers, tablets, or
phones. Teachers and educational cohorts have similar user interfaces, and if students
lack the proper gear, they can go to one of these classroom huts, located around the
region, which all have connectivity and public screens.”
       Ishimwe stood from the table, motioning for the others to do the same. “Actu-
ally, this is good timing. I want to show you how the smart interface on this system
works in context. I’ve planned a little demonstration at the nearby irrigation station.
When you get there, put on your AR glasses and enter this code. It will make the
system think that you’re Jan Alleman, a young man in the tenth grade who wants
to be a civil engineer. When you arrive at the pumping station, you’ll see how the
AI-recommender suggests a variety of lessons, including some hybrid activities that
incorporate multiple competency sets. Is everyone rested and ready? Good, let’s
head out.”


                                        !%"
Ehuang’s Story
“ . . . but in two years, our forecast predicts a shortage of professionals across your
400 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     medical sector,” Ehuang explained through the video conference to her audience
     on the other side of the world. She was one of the senior scientists at Pac-World
     Informatica (PWI), a world leader in data engineering and analytics. Her specialty
     was education and workforce data, and today, she was briefing the results of her
     most recent project. A consortium of civic leaders had commissioned PWI to gauge
     the health of their education, training, and employment indicators and to help them
     predict potential risks and opportunities.
            “This result, which I report at a 90 percent confidence interval, shows a short-
     fall of 18 to 23 percent. Fortunately, we have recommendations for you.” Ehuang
     pressed her screen, advancing the presentation to the next page. There, she drilled
     into several courses of action her team had prepared. These included proposals for
     educational apprenticeships and new vocational modules to help mitigate some high
     attrition rates they’d uncovered. Ehuang walked through several more projections.
     One showed how certain improvements to science programs in secondary schools
     would predictably improve their medical sector workforce along with jobs in other
     bio-related fields. They also discussed some mature vo-tech programs that the com-
     munities could implement.
            “These vocational curricula are produced by a Finnish company called Oi-
     vallus. They partner with us, and we can help arrange for them to work with your
     school system, if you’d like. Also, a notable feature of the curricula is their embed-
     ded assessments, courtesy of PWI. These include the typical tests and evaluative
     simulations but also many stealth assessments, which have a significantly greater
     reliability and validity when used over time.”
            Ehuang also pitched a creative solution available from another one of PWI’s
     partners. “It’s called the Pathways Network. You purchase subscriptions, with a high
     majority of those proceeds directly supporting the program’s operation, or you pro-
     vide in-kind resources like some faculty service. Participation gives direct access
     to entry-level employees who matriculate through a rigorous program and receive
     certifications from a well-accredited board. This won’t completely solve your worker
     shortage (because the graduates don’t typically emigrate), but a portion of your at-
     risk jobs can be filled through telehealth. This means Pathway could be an ideal way
     to augment your local communities while also growing global connections.”
            Ehuang continued through the presentation, next reviewing several indicators
     tied to arts and humanities. She also shared some interesting correlations her team
     had uncovered about population wellbeing, worker sick days, and various arts
     programs. As she began to flip to the next digital page, one of the viewers, a woman
     whose screen name read Mme Renée Bouchard interrupted.
                       The Future World with Learning Engineering: A Story | 401



       “Pardon me, but before we continue, could you address the gray section on
that chart?”
       The woman’s eye had been drawn to a voided section of the visualization.
       “This place has unavailable data. Although we can collect this data, it hasn’t
been integrated into the analysis because of privacy policies. This data could be
useful, as it gives a more complete picture of primary education factors,” Ehuang
replied. “Actually, this is a good time to explain. You can see the ‘more details’ box
near the bottom of your screens, meh? Click it and I will highlight something.”
        Ehuang pressed a spot on her display, making the presentation jump to the
appendix. It showed a chart with cost figures and copious fine print. “This is the
work-breakdown cost of our project. The green-colored portion, here, is overhead
cost. The next section is the labor-hour cost, mostly for analysis and reporting. Look
at the portions highlighted in blue. Those indicate the data usage fee. Around half
of the report cost is used for microtransactions to the data owners. This fee doesn’t
apply to all data. Some of it comes at no cost from sensors in your own public
infrastructure. Some other data was provided by your schools, at no cost to PWI. But
individual data points—particularly those collected by PWI or its partners—each
connect to a distributed ledger that records third-party uses of it. In return, PWI
(or whomever uses that data) sends a very small payment back to the person who
produced it—the student or worker, in this case.”
       “So, to answer Ms. Bouchard’s question more fully: The missing data on the
earlier chart is governed by privacy regulations that prevent us from collecting or
analyzing it. But, if you wanted to, we could ‘turn on’ that data collection for stu-
dents. You would need to gain their permissions and those of their legal guardian.
And we’d need to provide micropayments to all who consent. Make sense, meh?”
       “That does make sense,” a man with a graying mustache remarked. His screen
name read Lucas Russell. “How does this work with the Autodex service that we
recently purchased for the public schools? Should we anticipate escalating costs as
the program’s implementation expands?”
       “No,” Ehuang said. “The data in Autodexes (or any brand of education, em-
ployment, and experience record) belongs to the individual owning that wallet, lah.
So, there are no privacy restrictions or microtransactions for their own use of their
own data. This has been codified in various self-sovereignty regulations, including
several endorsed by your own nation. People must be allowed unfettered access to
their own data.”
       “How does that work with schools and businesses? If someone is, let’s say, a
nurse at a regional hospital, does the hospital or the medical system have access to
402 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     their records?”
            Inwardly, Ehuang counted her blessings that Tan (their unit’s legal and
     ethics officer) had required her to earn that credential in regional data regulations.
     Originally, she’d groused about the compliance training. She was a data scientist—
     not an attorney after all! But she had to admit, the training had paid dividends,
     especially in meetings like this.
            “Yes and no,” she replied to Mr. Russell. “Workers, for example, may freely
     provide data such as their earned credentials or their competency mosaic to their em-
     ployer. But organizations may only access these freely for the benefit of that worker,
     such as hiring or development. And they may not store the employee’s information
     outside of their Autodex without permission. But a hospital or health care system
     may access those data for, say, workforce planning or even for broader goals, such
     as scientific studies, if the data owner has set their privacy permissions accordingly
     and microtransitions are paid.”
            “So, if we’d like to identify high-potential junior medical workers, or others
     who we could up-skill into lower-density health care roles, would that be possible?”
     a different woman, marked as Councillor Namid, asked.
            “In general, yes.” Ehuang responded. “In fact, that’s one of the most effica-
     cious uses of such data, and it leads me back to some recommendations we had
     prepared. Shall we return to the main presentation?”




     By the time the briefing had ended, Ehuang felt wrung out. It had only taken a few
     hours, but briefing clients across a video conference—at five o’clock in the morning,
     no less—was exhausting! Fortunately, she’d planned her workday wisely, blocking
     the rest of it for quiet data science tasks. Psychometrics and statistical computing
     were just the thing to soothe Ehuang. She stretched and flipped on the electric kettle,
     which sat on the other side of her small home office. Her dog, Ginger Bean, stirred
     on his little bed as she passed, exposing his furry belly in hopes of some pets, which
     Ehuang dutifully provided as she waited for the water to boil.
           With a steaming tea in hand, she returned to her workstation and clicked the
     Command Station app. It brought up her assignments, reports, and team chatter. She
     had two tasks for the day, in addition to that early morning briefing. Her team had
     received a new job from a major athletic brand who wanted to create data-driven
     credentials for lifestyle activities, like mountain climbing or snowboarding. She and
     her team needed to identify the stealth assessment factors. She would create those
                       The Future World with Learning Engineering: A Story | 403



classifiers by analyzing the data streams from the brand’s wearable sensors. The
company wanted to issue validated digital badges to people who wore their gear
while accomplishing certain athletic feats, as logged by the smart apparel. It seemed
like a complex task—but incredibly exciting! Ehuang couldn’t wait to dig into it. But
first, she had better clear out some of her backlog.
        She owed one of her colleagues at Oivallus a follow-up. Ehuang had worked
with Dahlia for years, and now counted the learning scientist among her friends,
even though they had never met in person. Dahlia wanted to coordinate on the
embedded assessments in their Finnish National Agency for Education project. It
had something to do with connecting learning analytics from the K-12 curriculum
to improved feedback for teachers and mentors. If it had been up to Ehuang, she’d
have simply shown the faculty the educational data, but Dahlia insisted on creating
something she called “scaffolded support.” It tied into a decision support system
Oivallus helped to maintain, and although Ehuang didn’t understand the details,
she could appreciate the need to validate the interactions between the data streams,
teacher recommendations, and performance outcomes.
        Ehuang checked the time on her computer. It was barely past 8:00 a.m., too
early for Dahlia in Finland. That meant Ehuang could dive into that athletic sensor
data, after all, at least for a few hours. This was going to be a fun day!


                                        !&"
Conclusion
This chapter was written as a story to illustrate several themes. In Arun’s section,
we incorporated notions of data-driven learning analyses, human-AI teaming, social
learning, crowdsourcing from both experts and learners, A/B testing, and trust. In
Dahlia’s section, we emphasized the critical role learning theory plays in building
quality education and training interventions, and we touched on nonlinear learning
concepts, competency-based learning, twenty-first century competencies, social and
problem-based learning, semantic coherence, and the integration of multiple sub-
jects into a single curriculum.
       Dominic’s section highlights the collaboration between pedagogical and
technological experts as well as concepts such as credentials, AI mentors, personalized
learning, and the integration of schooling and employment sectors. Perhaps most
notably, this section also introduced the Autodex, a persistent record of someone’s
education, employment, and experience. Ishimwe’s section builds on several learning
404 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     technology topics, including augmented reality, network connectivity, AI-driven
     personalization, and the internet of things. Her section also extends the theme of
     blurred boundaries across educational, commercial, and geographical borders, and
     importantly, it highlights educational access and equity issues. Finally, Ehuang’s
     section focuses on assessment, for both formal and informal learning contexts, and it
     references learning analytics, stealth assessment, data privacy, and self-sovereignty.
            Taken together, these five stories emphasize the diverse, interdisciplinary
     teamwork needed for learning engineering. In the future, we imagine learning
     theorists working closely with technology developers, psychometricians, data
     scientists, business leaders, and community advocates—among many others.
     Similarly, we foresee an evolution in learning and employment, with both shifting
     toward anytime, anywhere modalities and moving away from artificial constraints
     such as age, location, and time.
            Humans, by our nature, are always learning, but in the future, we imagine there
     will be mechanisms that allow individuals to earn credit for ubiquitous learning—
     even experiences like climbing a mountain. Informal learning will be captured
     through various data streams, possibly through stealth assessments running in the
     background, making it more measurable and accreditable. And when enough evidence
     has been demonstrated, someone may be able to earn inferred ranks in a competency
     or a verified credential, like a digital badge. Similarly, we would expect that many of
     these learning experiences would help reveal traditionally underrepresented factors,
     such as social or emotional capabilities, and that such valuable competencies will
     become more explicitly recognized in individuals’ personal profiles.
            Changing how education, employment, and experiences interact and are
     credited will, necessarily, also have large effects on today’s formal learning
     institutions. For example, there will be a significant power transfer from teachers
     (today’s classroom leaders) to students, who will be more empowered to pursue
     their own learning goals and definitions of success. In the intelligence augmentation
     economy, where new knowledge is created faster than it can be consumed, this
     learning-to-learn skill will be essential, along with other novel or reimagined twenty-
     first century competencies, such as collaboration, empathy, and creativity. Similarly,
     self-regulation and other metacognitive skills will grow in importance, as success in
     this self-driven, nonlinear, AI-supported life-long learning environment will depend
     so heavily on them.
            Because this chapter focuses on the learning engineering process, the
     involvement of teachers and trainers was muted in the narrative. However, we
     anticipate that learning facilitators (of all flavors) will continue to fill important,
                       The Future World with Learning Engineering: A Story | 405



albeit different, roles. Teaching methods, subject areas, technologies, and data-driven
algorithms will change the character of their jobs. Their roles will evolve from “sage
on the stage” (a more passive approach focused on information transfer) to “guide on
the side” (an active mentor who helps scaffold knowledge and offer coaching across
mental, social, emotional, and physical domains).
       In addition to learning technology and technique, significant portions of our
story focused on data. The big data revolution promises to have massive, paradigm-
changing impacts on education and employment. This chapter paints an optimistic
picture, but we’ve also hinted at the darker side of what’s possible. For example,
data-rich and AI-enabled contexts present opportunities to spread disinformation,
create inequitable access to quality information, or misuse personal data. While we
mustn’t let these risks derail progress, we do have an imperative to address them.
For example, what safeguards can the learning engineering community establish to
ensure educational access and build internal safeguards against corrupt or degraded
information? How can we quantify and validate trust in educational resources or
manage the veracity and potential bias of data sources and analyses? Privacy and
protection of data are other areas of concern, along with issues of self-sovereignty
of one’s own data. We will need to invest in intentional planning, policies, and
governance to prepare for this dynamic worldwide system of systems.
       We believe the capabilities described in this chapter are within reach. Each of
the techniques and technologies exists in some form today (if not yet fully realized or
deployed). Similarly, there is a real desire for quality formal and informal learning,
improved measurement, data-driven analyses, and broad integration across global
education and employment practices. So, the question isn’t technical feasibility or
motivation, rather the question is whether we can organize a practical, equitable,
and sustainable learning engineering system. This is the challenge that we, the
burgeoning learning engineering community, face. Will we rise to the challenge,
navigating complex integrated systems, ethical conundrums, and wise governance?
We have the tools if we’re willing to commit to its success. The future of learning is
our story to write.
406 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Endnote
     1 An effect size of 3.0 means that 99.9% of the experimental group outperformed the control group.
       In practice, it’s essentially the highest effect size. Today, the best designed intelligent tutors can
       produce this effect size as compared to traditional training and education modalities. For exam-
       ple, see Kulik, James A., and J. Dexter Fletcher. “Effectiveness of intelligent tutoring systems:
       a meta-analytic review.” Review of Educational Research 86, no. 1 (2016): 42–78. https://doi.
       org/10.3102/0034654315581420
                                                               About the Authors | 407




About the Authors
Avron Barr
                        Avron Barr edited the seminal Handbook of Artificial Intel-
                        ligence while at Stanford University and then co-founded
                        Teknowledge, an early AI startup in Silicon Valley. As a
                        consultant, he helps people understand, explain, and market
                        cutting-edge software. Avron is an expert on the infrastruc-
                        ture needed to support AI-assisted learning. He chaired the
                        IEEE Learning Technology Standards Committee and cur-
rently serves on the IEEE Educational Activities Board. He’s had a life-long interest
in how AI will change the way we know, the way we learn, and the way we teach.


Michelle Barrett
                          Dr. Michelle D. Barrett is Vice President of Research and
                          Learning Engineering for Edmentum, where she leads
                          initiatives in learning engineering, efficacy research,
                          psychometrics and assessment design. After starting
                          her career in education teaching middle and high school
                          mathematics, Dr. Barrett has since held research, technical,
                          and leadership roles at the Colorado Commission on Higher
Education, the Colorado Department of Education, CTB / McGraw-Hill, Pacific
Metrics, and ACT. She is published in the Journal of Educational and Behavioral
Statistics, the Journal of Educational Measurement, the International Journal of
Artificial Intelligence in Education, and Psychometrika. Dr. Barrett serves on the
Board of Directors for the nonprofit organizations AIS Consortium and We Can
Learn and chaired the IEEE Industry Consortium on Learning Engineering SIG
on AI and Adaptive Technology from 2018 to 2019. Dr. Barrett earned her BS from
Stanford University, her MEd from Harvard University, a graduate certificate in
large-scale assessment from the University of Maryland, and her PhD from the
University of Twente, Netherlands. She also holds certifications in Scaled Agile,
Lean Six Sigma, and Pragmatic Marketing.
408 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Erin S. Barry
                              Erin S. Barry, MS, is Assistant Professor in the Department
                              of Military and Emergency Medicine at the Uniformed
                              Services University (USU). She is a biomedical and
                              biobehavioral scientist with expertise in research design,
                              data management, statistical analyses, and assessment.
                              Her role is to work on all aspects of leadership curriculum,
                              assessment, and research and development to translate
     scientific materials and evidence to be effectively taught and disseminated. She
     serves as Principal Researcher for several studies of leadership that focus on
     individual characteristics, interpersonal dynamics, team building, and academic
     performance as predictors of leadership competence. Ms. Barry earned a BE in
     Biomedical Engineering from Vanderbilt University. She earned an MS in Biomedical
     Engineering from the University of Texas at Arlington. She has worked at USU
     since 2010 where her research has focused on traumatic brain injury, post-traumatic
     stress disorder, and leadership. In addition, she helps to mentor graduate and medical
     students with regard to research activities and is a leadership coach for faculty, staff,
     and students. She is currently working on her PhD in Health Professions Education
     focusing on leadership and followership within healthcare teams.


     Laura Casey
                              Dr. Laura Casey is a professor in the Applied Behavior
                              Analysis (ABA)/Special Education program at the
                              University of Memphis. She earned her doctoral degree
                              in Educational Psychology, a Master of Science in School
                              Psychology, a Master of Arts in Community Counseling,
                              and a Bachelor’s in Psychology. She completed her doctoral
                              intern at the May Institute with an emphasis in ABA and
     Positive Behavior Supports in the school. She is a board certified behavior analyst
     (BCBA), a nationally certified counselor (NCC), and a nationally certified school
     psychologist (NCSP). She has been the PI and Co-PI on multiple grants totaling over
     6 million dollars. She has over 65 peer-reviewed publications and a leading book in
     ABA and early childhood. Dr. Casey teaches undergraduate and graduate courses
     in behavior analysis and autism, specializing in evidence-based practice, ethics, and
     assessment.
                                                               About the Authors | 409



Jessie Chuang
                        With a background in science and engineering, semi-
                        conductor industry R&D, and consultancy experience
                        with corporations on learning technologies and AI, Jessie
                        believes that innovations flourish from the collaboration be-
                        tween parties in different domains, and has been dedicated
                        to building interdisciplinary knowledge networks for big
                        challenges, digital transformation, and open innovations.
She co-founds Wise Ocean to help scaleups build the growth journey to scale up im-
pact through strategic partnerships across boundaries. She is also on the Executive
Board of IEEE IC Industry Consortium on Learning Engineering (ICICLE) and
works on industry and corporate engagement for ICICLE.


Scotty D. Craig
                         Dr. Scotty Craig is an Associate Professor of Human Sys-
                         tems Engineering at Arizona State University and Director
                         of the DoD Advanced Distributed Learning Initiative Part-
                         nership Laboratory at Arizona State University. He has a
                         dual affiliation with the Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineer-
                         ing and the Mary Lou Fulton Teachers College. Dr. Craig
                         has expertise at the intersection of cognitive psychology,
usability, and the science of learning (specifically learning technology). He has pub-
lished widely in the intersecting areas of psychology, education, and technology. Dr.
Craig’s previously funded projects include grants and contracts from the Institute of
Educational Sciences, Office of Naval Research, and several organizations within
the US Department of Defense. He has served on the program committee for AIED,
iFEST, and Cognitive Science and the editorial board for Journal of Educational
Psychology, Computers & Education (open), International Journal of STEM Edu-
cation, and the journal Technology, Mind, & Behavior. He has also guest edited vol-
umes for the International Journal of Learning Technology, International Journal of
STEM Education, and Journal of Research on Technology in Education and edited
three books: End-User Considerations in Educational Technology Design, Tutoring
and Intelligent Tutoring Systems, and Readings in Training and Simulations Vol 2.
410 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Erin Czerwinski
                             Erin Czerwinski is the Manager of Learning Engineering
                             for the Open Learning Initiative (OLI) and the Simon Ini-
                             tiative’s Community/Product Manager at Carnegie Mel-
                             lon University (CMU), leading the charge to advance the
                             university’s strategic initiative to be the leader in learning
                             science and learning engineering. Erin has deep expertise
                             defining and using learning science methodologies, best
     practices, and product quality guidelines to deliver impactful learning experiences,
     with over fifteen years of experience effectively designing, implementing, evaluat-
     ing, and improving online courses, curricula, and platforms. Erin has also provided
     curriculum leadership at Western Governors University, and was the Director of
     Learning Engineering at Acrobatiq, Inc. after serving in a Learning Engineering po-
     sition with CMU’s OLI. She serves on the IEEE Industry Consortium on Learning
     Engineering Steering Committee and chairs the Maturity Standards for Learning
     Solutions & Tools Special Interest Group.


     Brandt Dargue
                              Brandt Dargue is a Sr. Systems Engineer and Boeing Asso-
                              ciate Technical Fellow specializing in adaptive, personal-
                              ized, competency-based learning for Boeing Training Solu-
                              tions. Brandt has spent his 33 years at Boeing researching,
                              designing, developing, integrating, and testing training and
                              performance support solutions for Boeing customers and
                              employees. Brandt’s main focus is in automated curation of
     learning and operational experiences. He is inventor and co-inventor of several pat-
     ents for adaptive training curation technologies that enable automated performance
     assessment, adaptive scenarios, intelligent tutoring, and adaptive instruction. These
     technologies have been applied to several learning experience modalities, including
     e-learning, classroom instruction, simulations, virtual / augmented environments,
     and live aircraft. Brandt has served as technical lead, principal investigator, or pro-
     gram manager on numerous government contracts to create adaptive training solu-
     tions and to develop / perform the empirical studies to measure their effectiveness.
                                                               About the Authors | 411



Chris Dede
                        Chris Dede is the Timothy E. Wirth Professor in Learning
                        Technologies at Harvard’s Graduate School of Education.
                        His fields of scholarship include emerging technologies,
                        policy, and leadership. In 2007, he was honored by Harvard
                        University as an outstanding teacher, and in 2011, he was
                        named a Fellow of the American Educational Research
                        Association. He is currently a member of the OECD 2030
Scientific Committee and an Advisor to the Alliance for the Future of Digital
Learning, sponsored by the Mohammed bin Rashid Global Initiative (MBRGI). His
co-edited books include: Scaling Up Success: Lessons Learned from Technology-
based Educational Improvement; Digital Teaching Platforms: Customizing
Classroom Learning for Each Student; Teacher Learning in the Digital Age: Online
Professional Development in STEM Education; Virtual, Augmented, and Mixed
Realities in Education; Learning Engineering for Online Education: Theoretical
Contexts and Design-Based Examples; and The 60-Year Curriculum: New Models
for Lifelong Learning in the Digital Economy.


Diana Delgado
                         Diana Delgado is an Assistant Professor in the Applied
                         Behavior Analysis Program at the University of Memphis
                         and a Board Certified Behavior Analyst. Dr. Delgado has
                         provided behavioral services to individuals with develop-
                         mental disabilities and ASD, in home settings, schools and
                         clinics, and she supervises students who are in training to
                         obtain certification. Dr. Delgado has been a professor of be-
havior analysis at the graduate level for 11 years and is an active contributor to the
field through her research and service activities. She has published her research in
Behavior Analysis in Practice, The Psychological Record, Children and Youth Ser-
vices Review, The Behavior Analyst Today, Mexican Journal of Behavior Analysis,
and also in Latin American journals of psychology including Conductual, Suma
Psicológica, and Revista Latinoamericana de Psicología. Her research focuses in
the areas of learning processes in humans, problem solving, and in the application of
behavior analysis to problems of social significance.
412 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Tanvi Domadia
                             Tanvi Domadia is a Learning Engineer at Carnegie Mellon’s
                             Open Learning Initiative. She has a background in Com-
                             puter Science, NGO leadership, game development, and
                             curriculum design. Prior to working at Carnegie Mellon
                             University, she has worked as a Senior Software Engineer
                             at Tata Institute of Social Sciences to develop interactive
                             tools for high school students in rural areas. She has devel-
     oped educational games in astronomy and math learning for ninth-grade students in
     India. She has led volunteer operations for conducting storytelling sessions at chil-
     dren’s homes with Bookwallah Organization. At OLI, she manages various projects
     ranging from course development to data-driven course improvement. Tanvi has a
     Masters in Educational Technology and Applied Learning Sciences from CMU and
     BE in Computer Science from KJ Somaiya College of Engineering.


     Jim Goodell
                              Jim Goodell is co-author of Student-Centered Learning:
                              Functional Requirements for Integrated Systems to Opti-
                              mize Learning and a thought leader in the world of learning
                              engineering and data standards. He is Director of Innova-
                              tion at Quality Information Partners, where he helps lead
                              development of the US Department of Education sponsored
                              Common Education Data Standards. He is Chair of the
     IEEE Learning Technology Standards Committee, chairs the IEEE Industry Con-
     sortium on Learning Engineering Competencies, Curriculum, and Credentials SIG,
     the IEEE Competency Data Standards Workgroup, the Adaptive Instructional Sys-
     tems Interoperability Workgroup, and serves on the ICICLE Steering Committee.
     He supports the US Chamber of Commerce Foundation’s T3 Innovation Network
     and co-led development of the Learning and Employment Record (LER) Wrapper
     Specification. Prior to QIP, he was Executive Vice President at the Center for Educa-
     tional Leadership and Technology where he led the development of interactive learn-
     ing technologies and provided information-driven process improvement solutions to
     state education agencies and school districts throughout the United States.
                                                                About the Authors | 413



Scott W. Greenwald
                          Scott W. Greenwald, PhD, is President and CEO of Three
                          Space Lab, a spatial computing company focusing on learn-
                          ing, collaboration, and communication. He’s a PhD alum
                          of the MIT Media Lab, where he wrote a thesis titled The
                          Equipped Explorer: VR as a Medium for Learning in 2017
                          with Prof. Pattie Maes. He’s a former Research Scientist at
                          MIT’s Materials Research Lab, where he pursued explor-
atory learning and interactive visualization for crystallography with Prof. Joseph
Checkelsky. He’s co-founder and chair of the nonprofit Reality Hack, Inc., which
co-produces an annual VR / AR hackathon event at MIT. He has co-created numer-
ous VR installations and several live performances using AR and VR technology,
where his past and present projects have involved the neuroscience of the retina, im-
prov comedy, immersive narrative for children, crystallography, simulating electro-
statics, 3D capture of a string quartet, stories of flight from East Berlin, and contem-
porary circus. He holds degrees from Northwestern University, the Free University
of Berlin, and MIT, and has recently been appointed a Visiting Professor in Design
and Computation, a joint program between TU Berlin and UdK Berlin. In his spare
time, he practices dance improvisation, contact staff juggling, guitar, and singing.


Andrew J. Hampton
                           Andrew Hampton is an Assistant Professor of Psychology
                           in the Behavioral Sciences Department at Christian Broth-
                           ers University. He studied Human Factors / Industrial Or-
                           ganizational Psychology at Wright State University. At the
                           University of Memphis, he served as project manager on a
                           pioneering hybrid tutor, chair of the IEEE Standards Asso-
                           ciation working group for Adaptive Instructional Systems,
and project co-leader for a conversation-based AI for education. He has taught gen-
eral psychology, writing for psychology, research methods, psychology of film, per-
sonality psychology, and advanced statistics. Research interests include technologi-
cally mediated communication, psycholinguistics, adaptive educational technology,
artificial intelligence, and the ethical implications of AI.
414 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Daniel Jacobs
                           Daniel Jacobs is currently Director of Data Science at Age
                           of Learning. He has spent over five years working on their
                           industry leading product, My Math Academy, which teaches
                           math to young children. He has a long history of working in
                           educational technology, video games and data, and over ten
                           years of professional experience as a software engineer. He
                           has an MS in Electrical Engineering and a BS in Computer
     System Engineering from Stanford University.


     Aaron Kessler
                             Dr. Aaron Kessler is Assistant Director, Learning Sciences
                             and Teaching for Open Learning at MIT. In his role
                             within the residential education team, he is responsible for
                             working with faculty and course teams in the development
                             and research of online and residential courses that use
                             educational technologies. He serves on the IEEE Industry
                             Consortium on Learning Engineering Steering Committee
     and chairs the Design for Learning SIG. Prior to his arrival at MIT, Aaron taught
     high school chemistry, co-developed and supported the implementation of online
     learning environments and a cognitive tutoring system, and taught pre-service and
     in-service educators as an assistant professor of educational technology. At the core
     of all his work is supporting the development of instructional opportunities that
     provide learners the chance to engage in building deep conceptual understanding
     of content.
                                                             About the Authors | 415



Janet Kolodner
                        Janet Kolodner is Regents’ Professor Emerita of Computing
                        and Cognitive Science in Georgia Institute of Technology’s
                        College of Computing and Professor of the Practice at
                        Boston College’s Lynch School of Education and Human
                        Development. Her research has addressed issues in
                        learning, memory, and problem solving, both in computers
                        and in people. She pioneered the machine learning method
called case-based reasoning, which allows a computer to learn from its experiences,
and she used its underlying model to design a project-based approach to education
called Learning by Design. She is lead author of a comprehensive middle-school
science curriculum, Project-Based Inquiry Science, and collaborated on other
curriculum design projects. Kolodner was Founding Director of Georgia Tech’s
EduTech Institute, and she coordinated Georgia Tech’s Cognitive Science program
for many years. She is founding Editor-in-Chief and Editor-in-Chief Emerita of The
Journal of the Learning Sciences. She is a co-founder of the International Society
for the Learning Sciences and served as its first Executive Officer. Kolodner was a
program officer at the US National Science Foundation and led efforts to establish
and sustain the Cyberlearning Program (now called SETTL). Currently, she is co-
director of Boston College’s MA program in Learning Engineering, and she led its
development.
416 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Dina Kurzweil
                                Dr. Kurzweil is the Director of the Education & Technology
                                Innovation (ETI) Support office and an Assistant Professor
                                of Medicine in Health Professions Education at the
                                Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences.
                                As ETI Director, she provides strategic direction for the
                                ETI, instructional and educational technology support for
                                faculty, supervision of ETI personnel, and management of
     the ETI office. Prior to that, she worked at the National Defense University providing
     direction and vision of the instructional team supporting the Center for Educational
     Technology. Dr. Kurzweil has over twenty-five years of experience leading
     educational teams focused on effectively designing, implementing, evaluating, and
     improving courses and curricula in K-12 and higher education environments. She
     has served on numerous committees and task forces examining a wide range of
     topics including educational technologies, interprofessional education, professional
     development for K-12 and higher education faculty, learning management systems,
     program assessment and evaluation, instructional design, and teaching / faculty
     support paradigms. Dr. Kurzweil’s scholarly interests include a wide variety of
     issues in learning, teaching, instructional design, faculty development, leadership,
     teams and educational technology.


     Jodi Lis
                             Jodi Lis is a Senior Learning Advisor at an international
                             nonprofit organization. She has over twenty years experience
                             designing, implementing and monitoring digital learning
                             interventions in workforce development, pre-service
                             education and capacity-building initiatives for the health
                             and education sectors in low-resource environments. She
                             has been a computer teacher at an international school in
     The Gambia, directed an organization technology to promote the use of technology
     in education in West Africa and advised digital education programs in primary and
     secondary schools, teacher training colleges and health training institutions and
     facilities throughout Africa. She is on the Executive Board of IEEE IC Industry
     Consortium on Learning Engineering (ICICLE).
                                                              About the Authors | 417



Prasad Ram
                         Dr. Prasad Ram (“Pram”) is the Founder, CEO of Gooru.
                         While at Google, he developed the prototype of Gooru Nav-
                         igator—a GPS for Learning. Gooru since has become an
                         independent nonprofit organization that provides Gooru
                         Navigator with web and mobile applications for students,
                         teachers, parents and school leaders. Students seeking to
                         learn a topic are presented with an adaptive pathway of
learning activities and teachers, parents and school leaders obtain real-time action-
able insights to personalize interventions. Gooru reaches over 7 million learners
through over sixty collaborators. Previously, Pram led Google Books for Education
in Mountain View and before that he was the head of Google R&D in India and led
projects on Google Maps, News, Language Technologies, Search, and Ads. Pram
received the Founders’ Award at Google for his work on Google Ads. Prior to joining
Google, Pram led engineering at Yahoo! and was a scientist at Xerox Research. Pram
has a PhD in Computer Science from UCLA, and a BTech in Computer Science from
Indian Institute of Technology-Bombay, India.


Brandt Redd
                         Brandt Redd is CTO for MatchMaker Education Labs and
                         Secretary to the IEEE Learning Technology Standards Com-
                         mittee. He is a recognized authority in learning tech nology
                         strategy with expertise in competency-based learning,
                         advanced assessment, and learning data standards. Redd
                         previously served as CIO at the Smarter Balanced Assess-
                         ment Consortium and, prior to that, as Senior Technology
Officer for Education at the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Redd coordinates the
EdMatrix.org directory of Learning Tech standards. He helped found three success-
ful startups and is co-inventor of three patents. He has a BS in Computer Science
and an MBA from Brigham Young University.
418 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Steve Ritter
                             Steve Ritter is Founder and Chief Scientist at Carnegie
                             Learning. Dr. Ritter was instrumental in the development
                             and evaluation of the Cognitive Tutors for mathematics. He
                             is the author of numerous papers on the design, architecture
                             and evaluation of Intelligent Tutoring Systems and other ad-
                             vanced educational technology and is recognized as an ex-
                             pert on the design and evaluation of educational technology
     and on educational analytics. He is lead author of an evaluation that is one of the
     few to be judged by the US Department of Education’s What Works Clearinghouse
     as meeting their standards without reservations. He has received several awards,
     including the Best Paper award at the International Conference on Educational Data
     Mining. Carnegie Learning’s mathematics curricula are currently used by over
     500,000 students each year.


     Bror Saxberg
                              Bror Saxberg served most recently as the VP of Learning
                              Science at the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, where he worked
                              on how to bring more evidence-based practices into the
                              learning ecosystem as a whole. He previously served as the
                              Chief Learning Officer at Kaplan, Inc, where he worked to
                              convert Kaplan into a “learning engineering” organization.
                              Before that he served as Senior Vice President and Chief
     Learning Officer at K12, Inc., where he helped build evidence-based learning for
     practical use at scale across K-12. Prior to this, he had assignments at Knowledge
     Universe, Dorling Kindersley, and McKinsey. Saxberg holds a BA in Mathematics
     and BS in Electrical Engineering from the University of Washington, both received
     in 1980. He received an MA in Mathematics from Oxford University, and also re-
     ceived his PhD in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science from MIT in 1989
     and an MD from Harvard Medical School in 1990.
                                                                About the Authors | 419



Sae Schatz
                        Sae Schatz, PhD, serves as the Director of the Advanced
                        Distributed Learning (ADL) Initiative, a science, technology,
                        and policy program under the Office of the Secretary of
                        Defense in the US Department of Defense. Before joining
                        the government in 2015, Sae worked as an applied human–
                        systems scientist, with an emphasis on human cognition
                        and learning, adaptive systems, learning technologies,
performance assessment, and modeling and simulation. Sae has authored numerous
peer-reviewed scholarly publications, and she led development of three military
textbooks. More recently, she co-edited the book, Modernizing Learning: Building
the Future Learning Ecosystem, which defines a blueprint for revolutionizing
training and education through technology, data, next-generation learning science,
and innovation. Sae has worked in defense training and education for over a decade,
and she holds a doctorate in Modeling and Simulation from the University of Central
Florida.


Jordan Richard Schoenherr
                        Jordan Richard Schoenherr, PhD, is an Assistant Professor
                        (Department of Psychology, Concordia University), an Ad-
                        junct Research Professor in the Department of Psychology
                        and a member of the Institute for Data Science at Carleton
                        University, and a research and ethics consultant. He has
                        published widely in the areas of cognitive psychology, med-
                        ical education, ethics, and scientific integrity, served on the
Executive Board for the International Society for Psychophysics, worked on IEEE
Standards Association working group for Adaptive Instructional Systems and Adap-
tive Instructional Systems Ethics, and was a member of the Alan Turing Institute’s
AI in Cybersecurity working group. His research interests focus on understanding
judgment and decision-making in pure and applied domains including ethics.
420 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Robert Sottilare
                             Dr. Robert Sottilare is the Director of Learning Sciences
                             at Soar Technology, Inc. (soartech.com) and Chairman of
                             the Board for the not-for-profit Adaptive Instructional Sys-
                             tems (AIS) Consortium (aisconsortium.org), an industry
                             group focused on enhancing the effectiveness of tailored
                             training and educational solutions. He has nearly 40 years
                             of experience as a researcher, developer and evaluator of
     instructional technology and training systems. Dr. Sottilare received his doctorate in
     modeling and simulation with a focus on intelligent systems. His experience spans
     government (US Army and Navy science and technology organizations), industry
     and academia. His recent research has focused on adaptive instruction including
     learner and team modeling, automated authoring tools, AI-based real-time instruc-
     tional management, and evaluation methods for intelligent tutoring systems. At the
     US Army Research Laboratory, he founded and led the adaptive training science and
     technology program and is the father of the award-winning Generalized Intelligent
     Framework for Tutoring (GIFT), an adaptive instructional architecture. Dr. Sottilare
     is widely published with over 250 technical papers with over 2,500 citations. He is
     a senior member of the IEEE and founding Chair of the IEEE AIS Working Group
     and the HCII AIS Conference.


     Khanh-Phuong (KP) Thai
                              Dr. KP Thai is Director of Learning Sciences and Learning
                              Analytics at Age of Learning, Inc. She works on innovative
                              applications of learning sciences, game design, and analyt-
                              ics for advancing early childhood learning with adaptive
                              learning technology. Previously, she was Founder and Chief
                              Learning Scientist of an educational research consultancy
                              that provided research and analytic services to help orga-
     nizations develop evidence-based coursework, digital learning media, games, and
     assessments. She also led adaptive system design research as a Senior Learning and
     Data Scientist at Squirrel AI Learning. KP is co-editor of the Handbook of Research
     on Innovative Approaches to Early Childhood Development and School Readiness.
     She obtained her PhD in Cognitive Psychology with a minor in Quantitative Meth-
     ods from University of California, Los Angeles.
                                                               About the Authors | 421



Richard Tong
                          Richard Tong is an experienced technologist, executive,
                          entrepreneur and one of the leading evangelists for global
                          standardization efforts for learning technologies and
                          artificial intelligence. Richard Tong is currently the Chief
                          Architect and General Manager of US Operations, Squirrel
                          AI Learning. He also currently serves as the Chair of IEEE
                          Learning Technology Standards Committee and Chair
of IEEE artificial intelligence Standards Committee. Prior to Squirrel AI, he was
the Head of Implementation, Greater China Region for Knewton, and Director of
Solution Architecture for Amplify Education. He also served as the CTO of Phoenix
New Media (NYSE:FENG). On the academic and research front, he has organized
conferences such as the AIAED conferences (2018, 2019, 2020), and organized
workshops such as multimodal artificial intelligence for education workshops
(AIMA4EDU) at the IJCAI 2019, IJCAI 2020, IJCAI 2021, the ed-tech standard-
ization and collaboration workshops at the AIED 2019, AIED 2020 and AIED
2021. He was the workshop co-chair of AIED 2020, industry co-chair of ITS 2021
and AIED 2021 and held several track-chair positions in various AI and EdTech
conferences.


JJ Walcutt
                         Dr. JJ Walcutt is a scientist, innovator, and digital learn-
                         ing engineer who specializes in strategic development and
                         reform across education, military, and government. Her
                         current work focuses on leveraging digital transformation
                         capabilities for optimizing human cognition to drive deci-
                         sion superiority and improved performance across a wide
                         spectrum of programs including neuro-informed military
training, data-driven knowledge management, and talent development optimization.
Dr. Walcutt also recently served in the US Government as the Director of Innovation
at the Advanced Distributed Learning (ADL) Initiative under the Office of the Sec-
retary of Defense and as a Human Innovation Fellow under the Office of Personnel
Management. In her role at the Pentagon, Dr. Walcutt focused on promoting the sci-
ence of learning through the stewardship of policy and her service as a US Delegate
to NATO, Partnership for Peace, and as a national and international keynote speaker.
