 LEARNING
ENGINEERING
  TOOLKIT
Evidence-Based Practices from the
 Learning Sciences, Instructional
       Design, and Beyond

                     Edited by Jim Goodell
                          with Janet Kolodner

               Foreword by Chris Dede, Harvard University
                       Preface by Bror Saxberg

Contributions from Avron Barr, Michelle Barrett, Erin S. Barry, Laura Casey,
     Jesse Chuang, Scotty D. Craig, Erin Czerwinski, Brandt Dargue,
 Diana Delgado, Tanvi Domadia, Scott W. Greenwald, Andrew J. Hampton,
    Daniel Jacobs, Aaron Kessler, Dina Kurzweil, Jodi Lis, Prasad Ram,
   Brandt Redd, Steve Ritter, Sae Schatz, Jordan Richard Schoenherr,
    Robert Sottilare, Khanh-Phuong Thai, Richard Tong, and JJ Walcutt
Accolades
“I am so impressed with how clearly and methodically this book has laid out the main tenets of
the field and provided both practical examples and inspiring stories to bring the principles to life.
I think this will be an immensely useful resource.”
                             – Joseph South, PhD, Chief Learning Officer, International Society
                                for Technology in Education, and former director of the Office of
                                     Educational Technology at the US Department of Education

“Popularized by MOOCs and the move to online learning during the pandemic, learning
engineering is an emerging field that will become a standard discipline within universities in
the years to come. Where science is the understanding of nature and engineering is the use of
science in service of humanity, learning engineering incorporates learning science and cognitive
science-based strategies to improve student outcomes. The Toolkit is an essential resource for
understanding this field and a playbook for leveraging learning engineering.”
              – Anant Agarwal, PhD, Chief Open Education Officer at 2U and Founder of edX

“Great advancements in learning can come from a multi-disciplinary approach that recognizes
the value of different professions and mindsets.”
           – Angela L. Hernandez, EdD, Lead Skills Architect, Western Governors University

“The outstanding authors of this text answered most of my uncertainties about the new learning
engineering approach. The chapters in this well-written book clearly describe the questions
that need to be addressed when designing learning experiences for all ages and contexts. It
then provides tools that can be used to provide answers and generate new questions. Readers
who might be concerned about whether ‘engineering’ can be applied to human learning will be
impressed with the scope of the chapters and the examples provided.
      I was especially attracted to the emphasis on supporting diverse learners and on making
ethical decisions as well as the tools suggested for scaling small but successful efforts. The
approach described in this book is our best hope for drawing together the many professional
fields and specializations that attempt to create effective learning experiences in all areas. The
authors clearly intend to adopt the best of what we’ve learned from past research in related areas
while developing tools that fill the gaps in those areas. I intend to use the book as an introductory
text for my undergraduate instructional design and educational psychology students.”
                                   – Richard E. Clark, EdD, Emeritus Professor of Educational
                                  Psychology and Technology, University of Southern California

“This new Toolkit brings together complementary, diverse, and fresh perspectives on learning
and development in our rapidly changing world. I can see it forming an invaluable handbook
for learning and development professionals, or curious organisational leaders interested in the
science and engineering of effective learning at scale.”
                                         – Julian Stodd, author and founder of Sea Salt Learning
Accolades (Continued)
“I have talked with many CEOs of EdTech companies and chief learning officers over the past
few years. All of them have asked, ‘what is learning engineering and how do we do it?’ I have
wanted to have a handbook I could hand them and their teams to be able to better mature their
systems for designing and improving learning. Well, here it is! Full of theory, process, methods,
tools, and above all, examples, stories, and extremely practical tips. This book has everything a
learning team needs to begin applying learning engineering. And no wonder: It was written by
a truly cross-disciplinary, cross-industry, cross-functional, and truly boundary spanning team.
This book will sit next to my computer—well worn and marked through—as I guide teams in
building impactful learning experiences.”
                    – David Porcaro, VP of Learning and Innovation at General Assembly and
                     former Director of Learning Engineering at the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative

“The Learning Engineering Toolkit effectively introduces the foundations of this emerging
field and then provides a plethora of tools, strategies, and relevant examples that help the reader
clearly see what this might look like in practice. There are many valuable concepts here for
learning scientists, data scientists, software engineers, and leaders of organizations who are
seeking a systematic approach to actively designing and building interventions to improve
learner outcomes. This book presents a compelling case for learning engineering as a distinct
field and topic to which any future-thinking education professional should be paying attention.”
                                     – Chris Millet, Senior Director of Learning Design for the
                                       Penn State World Campus, Pennsylvania State University

“The references and storytelling bring new insights, a fresh perspective and wonderful synthesis.”
                                         – Jim Flanagan, Chief Operating and Strategy Officer,
                                              International Society for Technology in Education

“This book is an essential toolkit for learning and development professionals. It’s a comprehensive
roadmap for the new way of learning and working.”
                – Amy A. Titus, EdD, Human Capital Managing Director, Deloitte Consulting

“The Learning Engineering Toolkit offers a path to revolutionize how we experience learning
at school and work—by codifying the development and delivery of learning as a data-driven,
continuous design process. In the true spirit of human-centered design, learning engineering
integrates the power of diverse scientific disciplines, mixed-methods data collection, and a bias
for action through constant iteration and co-production with learners. Research is design, and
design is research. By building evidence into every step of the learning design and delivery
process, learning engineering can ensure learners engage fully, learn deeply, and perform
optimally.”
                – Sydney Heimbrock, PhD, Chief Industry Advisor for Government, Qualtrics
Cover image created by Sae Schatz using Adobe Stock #245704448 by pickup
First published 2023 by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN

Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business

© 2023 selection and editorial matter, Jim Goodell; individual chapters, the contributors

The right of Jim Goodell to be identified as the author of the editorial material, and of
the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections
77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

With the exception of What is Learning Engineering? from the Introduction, Chapter 1 and
Chapter 2 no part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by
any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission on writing from the publishers.

What is Learning Engineering? from the Introduction, Chapter 1 and Chapter 2 of this book
is available for free in PDF format as Open Access at www.taylorfrancis.com. It has been
made available under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
(CC-BY-NC-ND) 4.0 International license.

Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered tradem-
arks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this title has been requested

ISBN: 9781032208503 (hbk)
ISBN: 9781032232829 (pbk)
ISBN: 9781003276579 (ebk)

DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579

Editing assistance, visual design, and typesetting (in Acumin Variable
Concept, Calibri, Consolas, Ink Free, Market Pr, Nimbus Sans, P22 Cezanne
Pro, Source Serif Variable, Times New Roman, and Wingdings) by Sae Schatz.

Publisher’s Note: This book has been prepared from camera-ready copy
provided by the editor.

The Open Access version of What is Learning Engineering? from the Introduction
and Chapter 2 are funded by Jim Goodell.

The Open Access version of Chapter 1 is funded by MIT Open Learning.
CONTENTS
  Foreword.................................................................................................................................ix
  Preface ....................................................................................................................................xi

INTRODUCTION
  How do I use this book? .........................................................................................................1
  What is learning engineering?................................................................................................5

FOUNDATIONS
 01 Learning Engineering is a Process.............................................................................29
 02 Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences..............................................47
 03 Learning Engineering is Human-Centered ...............................................................83
 04 Learning Engineering is Engineering......................................................................125
 05 Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation ................................... 153
 06 Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 2): Analytics .............................................. 175
 07 Learning Engineering is Ethical .............................................................................. 201

TOOLS
 08 Tools for Understanding the Challenge.................................................................... 231
 09 Tools from the Learning Sciences............................................................................243
 10 Tools for Teaming .....................................................................................................255
 11 Lean-Agile Development Tools................................................................................269
 12 Human-Centered Design Tools ................................................................................279
 13 Data Instrumentation Tools ......................................................................................303
 14 Software and Technology Standards as Tools ......................................................... 311
 15 Tools for Learner Motivation ................................................................................... 333
 16 Implementation Tools ...............................................................................................347
 17 Ethical Decision-Making Tools ................................................................................ 361
 18 Data Analysis Tools ..................................................................................................365

VISION AND COMMENTARY
 19 The Future World with Learning Engineering: A Story ......................................... 381

AUTHORS
  About the Authors ...............................................................................................................407
Contributors, Reviewers, Interviewees
In addition to the twenty-nine authors this book couldn’t have been possible without count-
less others who participated in interviews or learning engineering groups, contributed key
ideas, reviewed drafts of chapters, or helped with the publishing process. Some people listed
here are named in stories used in the book and others played behind-the-scenes roles. And
the community that influenced this book goes beyond those named here. Thank you, all!


AUTHORS
Avron Barr                     Tanvi Domadia                  Brandt Redd
Michelle Barrett               Jim Goodell                    Steve Ritter
Erin S. Barry                  Scott W. Greenwald             Bror Saxberg
Laura Casey                    Andrew J. Hampton              Sae Schatz
Jesse Chuang                   Daniel Jacobs                  Jordan Richard Schoenherr
Scotty D. Craig                Aaron Kessler                  Robert Sottilare
Erin Czerwinski                Janet Kolodner                 Khanh-Phuong Thai
Brandt Dargue                  Dina Kurzweil                  Richard Tong
Chris Dede                     Jodi Lis                       JJ Walcutt
Diana Delgado                  Prasad Ram


OTHER CONTRIBUTORS
Vincent Alevin                 Richard Clark                  Patrick Getchell
Anthony Altieri                Nicola Cleveland               Ian Gibson
Maria Andersen                 Ted Courtney                   John Gillmore
Mart Aro                       Francisco Crespi               Christian Glahn
Brenda Bannan                  Richard Culatta                Amos Glenn
Michelle Beasley               Alisha Dakon                   Barish Golland
Peter Berking                  Meghan Edwards                 Abigail Goodell
Sujata Bhatt                   Sarah Ensor                    Benjamin Goodell
Norman Bier                    Charles Fadel                  Patti Goodell
Shelly Blake-Plock             Cameron Fadjo                  Sunil Gunderia
Chris Blakesley                Stephen Fancsali               Shawn Hammack
Mitch Bonnett                  Jim Flanagan                   Sherri Hartzell
Bill Brandon                   Marie Franetovic               Cristina Heffernan
Chelsea Chandler               Shane Gallagher                Neil Heffernan
Alexandria Clapp               Kirti Garg                     Angela L. Hernandez
Donald Clark                   Kumar Garg                     Davinia Hernandez-Leo
Kelli Hill                     Piotr Mitros                  Rebecca Scales
Michael Horn                   Tom Moher                     Richard Scheines
Nick Howe                      Erin Mote                     Daniel Schwartz
Simon Hsu                      John Murray                   Burr Settles
Shakir Hussain                 Alan Mustafa                  Eric Shepherd
Michael Jay                    Katie Nicksic                 Aaron Silvers
Edward Jennings                Amy Ogan                      Kimbery Sinnott
Bill Jerome                    Jenna Olsen                   Joseph South
Andy Johnson                   Elizabeth Owen                Jess Stahl
Alisha Kadon                   Kevin Owens                   Nick Stanley
David Kelly                    Bozena Pajak                  Adam Sullivan
Whitney Kilgore                Jim Paradiso                  William Sullivan, Jr.
Lissa Klueter                  Martina Pavelko               Candace Thille
Ken Koedinger                  Jenessa Peterson              Allyssa Thompson
Chad Lane                      Oliver Pincus                 Laura Thompson
Kim Larson                     David Porcaro                 Kristin Torrence
Lisa Larson                    Mark Potter                   Lauren Totino
Mark Lee                       Stephanie Pounds              Eric Tucker
Hao Li                         Mike Preble                   Rachel Van Campenhout
Eddie Lin                      Andrew Scott Pyle             Tom VanderArk
Marsha Lovett                  Thomas Reeves                 Todd Vanek
Laura Lukes                    Jess Resig                    Ellen Wagner
Linda Macaulay                 Robby Robson                  Lynn Wietecha
Susan Magdziarz                Jeremy Roschelle              Craig Wiggins
Greg Maki                      Todd Rose                     David Wiley
Emily Marasco                  Meagan Rothschild             Beverly Woolf
Karen Marcellas                Anindya Roy                   Fred Yan
Andrew McCallister             Nicholas Runco                Michael Yudelson
Brendan Meeder                 Henry Ryng                    Leonora Zefi
Christopher Millet             Ali Sadakon                   Carrie Zierath
Lee Mitchell                   Michael Sandbothe
Participants in IEEE ICICLE
Participants in the Learning Engineering Google Group

Editorial oversight by Janet Kolodner.

Special thanks to Benjamin Goodell for countless hours of copyediting, compilation, facili-
tation, and ghostwriting some stories based on interview transcripts. And special thanks to
the Quality Information Partners team for supporting this project and copyediting.
                           Foreword
The pandemic is a terrible human tragedy, but it has silver linings, as illustrated
in this series of innovation stories: silverliningforlearning.org. This Toolkit
describes one of the opportunities that forced remote instruction has created:
large-scale engineering of learning. Potentially, we now have sufficient students
and enough streams of multi-dimensional data to personalize each learner’s
experience: time, path, pace, place, choice, and voice. It’s disappointing that
many institutions are not recognizing this opportunity. Campus services that
support continuous evidence-based innovation in face-to-face instruction have
typically not created a learning engineering infrastructure in the rapid and
chaotic transition to remote teaching. Nor have they conducted professional
development on how instructors might take advantage of personalization
to each student, which is a powerful way of empowering marginalized and
underrepresented populations to realize their full potential.
      Although this failure to implement learning engineering is disappointing,
it’s clear that the pandemic is not going away anytime soon, and we are far
from some stable “new normal.” Over the next few years of online and HyFlex
teaching, we can apply the strategies, heuristics, and insights in this Toolkit.
If engineering learning at scale is realized, not only will many students and
instructors benefit, but also we will gain many new insights about the nature
of learning itself.




                                        Chris Dede      Harvard University
Preface
by Bror Saxberg

This book is a terrific source of insights, tools, and frameworks for learning
engineering. That term is not a new one—it was used by Herb Simon back in the
late 1960s to describe what university faculty members ought to be like when they
are teaching—but the fundamental importance of the idea seemed to disappear over
decades. This book does much to make clear why it’s a valuable practice, and how
to do it.
       Learning engineering is about the design of learning solutions in the real world.
This means, at its best, working with and within the constraints of communities
and learners, focused on clearly defined actions we want learners to become able to
decide and do, grounded in the sciences of learning and development, being guided
by (but not limited to) research and practice that has come before, and generating
and using high-quality evidence to problem-solve and iterate from an initial solution
to better solutions over time.
       Like many engineering initiatives (civil engineering, chemical engineering,
electrical engineering, and even medicine has an engineering flavor to it), learning
engineering is inherently multidisciplinary. While cognitive psychology and
education research have important insights to offer, as this book points out, so does
data science, computer science, motivational psychology, ethics, and more. This is
inherently a complex undertaking if you want to do it well.
       It’s worth the complexity, and worth doing it well. First, ignoring the com-
plexity doesn’t make it go away: You may wish that all learners master writing the
same way, from the same experiences and examples, but that does not make it so,
inconveniently and unfortunately. There have been many well-meaning but unsuc-
cessful efforts to “solve education” by scaling tools that worked in one context, with
one type of learner, with the hope that “surely this will work for all kids,” only for
schools, students, teachers, and parents to discover it’s not that easy.
       Engaging with the complexity is especially worthwhile now, in a context
of rapid change in tools, expertise, and best practices for organizations. If we can
get a deep and clear understanding of what top performers decide and do (both
consciously and nonconsciously) and how that changes over time, we will have
insights on how key people’s decisions and tasks should change—and how the
associated learning environments must change too. The real value of improving the
xii | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     median performance of high-value, high-volume, high-variance decision-makers in
     an organization (project managers in a construction firm, teachers/faculty/trainers
     in a learning environment, nurses in a health care setting, and so on) to get closer to
     that of top performers is often substantial.
            Becoming good at learning engineering also allows an organization to take
     advantage of the substantial familiarity of existing employees with the organization’s
     history, mission, purpose, and stakeholders. If you try to “fire and hire” your way
     to improved skills within an organization, the increasingly rapid pace of expertise
     change means you are having to replace key decision-makers faster and faster.
     Unfortunately, the deep mastery of relationships, mission, and context takes time
     (years, often) to master, so rapid turnover works against you. Reliably changing
     what your own people decide and do instead of changing out your people gives you
     the best of both worlds.
            This approach also pays dividends for people’s careers. As our working lives
     become longer, we can build more expertise. It does not have to be in the same field
     as we start out with: Research suggests it takes about ten years of intense half-time
     effort to build to world-class expertise in many domains. If our working lives now
     stretch out for four, five, even six decades, think of the combinatoric possibilities: For
     example, you might start out becoming an expert gardener, then shift to becoming
     an expert at business, then add robotics to your list: You are now the perfect person
     to set up a world-class robotic gardening company (especially if you add expertise
     in law to deal with inevitable lawsuits). The combinatorics are very helpful: If you
     take hundreds of different kinds of expertise, cross these together to create multi-
     domain experts, far from becoming irrelevant to the future, people become uniquely
     qualified to innovate in the many new niches unlocked.


     What does it take to do great learning engineering?
     As mentioned above, and discussed in the book, a first step is deeply and clearly
     understanding what you are trying to get people to decide and do, perhaps by under-
     standing what top performers decide and do (both consciously and unconsciously),
     with techniques like cognitive task analysis.
            It is important to recognize that top performers are usually not narrow domain
     experts: They are often also expert at communication, prioritization, organizing
     teams, motivation, and more, which are often not taught to mastery within conven-
     tional training programs in school or in the workplace. Real value accrues to orga-
     nizations that recognize this and whose experts then master these additional areas.
                                                                             Preface | xiii



       Tied closely to defining what we need people to become able to decide and do
is to develop sources of evidence about their ability to decide and do these things.
Following the evidence-centered design approach from the science of learning
measurement, the key is to accept the multi-dimensionality of the evidence-gathering
process: Instead of one perfect measure of a skill or capacity, think deeply about
what many instantiations and consequences of a complex skill should occur, and
then instrument many sources of evidence to look for these consequences. Yes, this
creates a complex picture—but the consequences of skill acquisition are a complex
picture in the real world.
       In addition, it’s critically important to be aware how different contexts for
learning and performance mean differences in the learning environments. Unlike
certain medical problems where the treatment depends almost exclusively on what
bug you have, or what narrow deficit you have, almost everything about successful
learning depends on various contexts: What have you already mastered related to
the new skills? What other things have you mastered or are you deeply familiar with
that could be drawn on to start learning new complex skills (limiting the cognitive
load)? What issues of motivation, including identity, are already cemented in your
mind before starting a round of learning, which may either help your progress, or
provide an additional challenge to be worked through? While important to draw on
research and experience from other settings, this means it is especially important to
use inclusive and equitable design processes, co-creating as closely as possible with
the people who will be doing the learning and the teaching, so as not to miss critical
elements of context that could help you or create unexpected challenges.
       Often, too, not enough attention is paid to the training of the other adults
in the learning environment. Many professional development experiences are
dreaded by teachers and trainers for good reason: They often do not reflect the
application of learning and development science principles, or a rich understanding
of the training / learning context, to train teachers and trainers for their work with
students. This runs the risk of creating incoherent learning environments for
students, as some of their experiences (for example, technology-enhanced ones) may
reflect one approach to learning, while other experiences (mediated by adults) may
reflect a different approach. It makes sense to design professional development for
teachers / trainers at the same time as you design new learning environments for
students / trainees, and use the same principles of evidence-grounded and context-
aware learning design, working closely with students and their teachers, to create
complete, coherent, and continuously improving learning environments.
       That last point is worth repeating: Expect to iterate. With any complex
xiv | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     innovation project, even as you do your best to create a high-functioning first draft,
     you should expect things to not go as expected for many different reasons. That
     means before you start, think ahead to what might go wrong and try to instrument
     what might be at risk. This way when failure occurs (and it usually will), you have
     a rich set of data to narrow in on exactly where in a complex set of interlocking
     processes and conditions the problem(s) might be. The mantra must be, Celebrate
     success, but instrument for failure!
            This book provides guidance for all these ideas. Authored by a wealth of
     experts from many different disciplines with a wide range of experiences, you will
     find all kinds of wisdom through many different lenses to help your projects be
     successful. The book is filled with examples of learning engineering in practice—it
     celebrates learning engineering as something enacted in the world, not a theory. The
     language and purpose is overwhelmingly practical, suited to giving good guidance
     to many different kinds of readers. And it includes a range of stories about many
     different kinds of learning engineers tackling different challenges in the world.
            As our need to change what we decide and do to follow the changing
     nature of expertise increases, becoming better at learning engineering allows our
     organizations and individuals to continue to grow, add value, and be motivated over
     their entire lives. This book provides a terrific toolkit to help expand the repertoire of
     methods to achieve extraordinary outcomes for people that can continue to improve
     over time.
INTRODUCTION
    SECTION INCLUDES “HOW TO USE THIS BOOK”
          + EXPLAINS LEARNING ENGINEERING
INTRODUCTION


How do I use this book?
by Jim Goodell

If you want to get the most out of this book, there is one thing that matters more than
any technique or rule. Unless you have this one thing, a thousand techniques and
strategies for learning and development will have little value. And if you do have
this one thing, then we think you can achieve great things with the insights and tools
in this book. Do you have a deep desire to help people learn? Do you have a driving
desire to help people reach their full potential and enjoy the new opportunities that
learning will bring to their lives? You do? Congratulations!
       Whatever your specific motivation—making the world a better place, being a
part of something bigger than yourself, improving the success of the work you do,
helping more people learn about what matters most to you, opening up your own ca-
reer opportunities and achieving personal success, or creating new opportunities for
success and fulfillment for traditionally disadvantaged people, or all of the above—
that deep desire to help people learn is essential to get the most out of this book.
       Picture yourself, in whatever role you play or will play, being part of some-
thing bigger than yourself, achieving great success, and being a valued key contrib-
utor to the learning experiences and conditions for learning that help people achieve
unprecedented success. Imagine breakthroughs in learning that are exponentially
better than what you see in today’s classrooms, training facilities, or online and
blended learning environments. Constantly remind yourself how important these
breakthroughs in learning are to you and how mastery of the concepts and use of
the tools in this book will lead to the richer, more fulfilled future for yourself and
for others.

                                        !!"
The introduction section is designed to cover the big ideas and set the context for
the rest of the book. The “What is Learning Engineering?” chapter is supported
by stories of real people doing learning engineering. Stories have proven effective
at making ideas stick. We suggest you start by reading through the introduction
section quickly at first to get the big picture and then reread it, stopping frequently


DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-2
2 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     to compare these concepts to your current approaches and notions of learning
     engineering. Even though your circumstances may be different from those of the
     people and organizations in the stories, you can look for ideas that you can transfer
     to your situation. Think about how the ideas might apply to you. What kinds of
     changes in your own thinking and practices, or the practices of your organization,
     would be needed to realize the potential of these learning engineering approaches?
     As you work through the book, consider how to apply what you’re learning to your
     own professional development in the field of learning engineering.


                                             !""
     Although we suggest a sequential read through the introduction section, you may
     want to randomly access other parts of the book, read some chapters out of order
     depending on your background knowledge and interests to suit your learning, and
     later reference different parts as you apply the tools to real learning engineering
     contexts. Some of the stories interwoven throughout the book build on one another,
     but the benefit of your self-directed active learning will override the value of reading
     the stories in sequential order, and they will make sense either way. So, feel free to
     follow the order in the book or jump around. Do whatever works for you.
            The sequential book format is not ideal for all kinds of learning and certainly
     not how you would use a toolkit, so we recommend adapting it to your needs at
     different stages of learning and application. You can think of this book as content in
     a learner-centered adaptive learning system, but you need to provide the intelligence
     to adapt the system. We’ve only provided some imperfect tools to help you fit some
     new ideas into what you already know, assess what you’re learning, and adjust what
     you do next to make it work best for you at any point in the process. Selectively use
     the parts of this book, at appropriate times, to augment your own intelligence and
     performance as a learning engineering professional.


                                             !#"
     This volume is meant to offer a kit of practical tools that can be applied to learning
     engineering. You can use the tools section in chapters eight through nineteen as
     you engage with each step of the learning engineering process. The section also
     includes tools and recommended practices that may be broadly applied across the
     learning engineering process including learning engineering as a team, Lean-Agile
     development, software and technology standards, learner motivation, design patterns
                                                           How do I use this book? | 3



for learning, and ethical decision-making.
       Tools have no value unless they are put to work. So, look for every opportunity
to use the tools in this book. Experiment with different tools and approaches in your
own work. What tools work best for what kinds of challenges? Reflect on what tools
worked well and why. How might small changes in how you do your work result in
products that better support learners and learning? The more you apply the concepts
and strategies, the more you will fix them into your long-term memory and cause
them to become valuable habits of mind and practice.


                                        !$"
This toolkit, just like any learning engineering solution, is intended to be iteratively
improved based on data about learner/user experiences. Please give us feedback on
your experiences with the book and how we might improve it in future revisions
or through supplemental services or resources. Send comments and suggestions by
email to:

                      learning.engineering.toolkit@gmail.com

Please note that we (the editor and authors) will not be able to respond personally to
every comment or suggestion—but we’ll try!
INTRODUCTION


What is learning
engineering?
by Jim Goodell

Many people are uncomfortable when the words learning and engineering are used
together. Online discussion threads on the topic of learning engineering prompted
strong reactions. One comment compared learning to the weather—a complex
outcome of social, cultural, and economic conditions that cannot be engineered (or
engineered for). Someone else correctly pointed out that learning is what a learner
does, not something done to the learner.
       Learning is a human process, and “engineering” sounds too mechanical or
industrial. The “art” of teaching sounds more natural. When talking about creating
solutions for learning, isn’t “design” a better term? The words learning engineering
justifiably raise concerns and questions, especially for professionals who care deeply
about human learning at all levels. In the following pages, we define learning engi-
neering—it’s engineering for learning. Learning engineers don’t engineer learning
any more than civil engineers engineer civilians. Just as civil engineers create and
maintain physical infrastructure for the benefit of civilians, learning engineering
creates solutions for the benefit of learners and learning.
       People from diverse fields of practice have wondered, is learning engineering
just a new label on what we already do? Is it possible for a teacher, instructional
designer, learning scientist, data scientist, or instructional system designer to do
learning engineering? If it’s different from what people already do, how is it different?
       Through the following pages, we hope to answer those questions and make
the case for learning engineering as a professional practice that complements related
professional practices and fields of study. We offer stories about teams of professionals
doing learning engineering—whether they call it learning engineering or use a
different name. In practice, however, what most education, training, and learning
analytics professionals do daily only partially overlaps with the practice of learning
engineering. Learning engineering is often concerned with solving problems that
teachers, curriculum designers, and textbook publishers are not usually asked to
solve.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-3
This chapter has been made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license.
6 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




                Complex systems, like weather patterns, produce emergent behavior that can be
                anticipated, but not engineered.


                You cannot engineer “learning,” similarly as you cannot engineer “happiness.”



                I also agree with you as “engineering learning” seems to make learning
                mechanical. Learning is a natural process. It can be analyzed, guided, supported
                and much more but “engineering” learning would be killing the natural process
                which is essential for the joy of learning. Learning analytics is more about
                analyzing to understand or improve the process, but not engineering it. Also,
                when we work on individual learning, personalized learning, it’s a natural
                process with unique abilities of the learner, whereas “engineering learning”
                seems to take back to ‘old school’ where all minds were treated alike.


                I, like you, would like to see what’s the thing that learning engineering does
                which is not done within LA/EDM/LS in order to understand the need of a
                separately “branded” community.


   FIGURE 0.1. Discussion thread about learning engineering (adapted from real discussion)



            This book offers learning and e-learning professionals opportunities to im-
     prove their work with additional engineering tools, techniques, and mindsets (with-
     out changing the name of what they do). And it offers foundational knowledge and
     tools for those wishing to practice as learning engineers.


                                               !!"
     In 1928, Scottish scientist Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin. The discovery
     was a scientific breakthrough that saved countless lives during and since World War
     II. The 1945 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded to Fleming and
     two Oxford University scientists who made progress in making concentrated peni-
     cillin and proved the effects of the drug. However, the Nobel Prize–winning scien-
     tists never developed the ability to produce the drug at scale. The Oxford team found
     that it was impossible to produce in sufficient quantities in their laboratory.
                                                       What is learning engineering? | 7



       In 1941, mounting deaths from World War II battle wounds prompted these
British scientists to reach out for help from the United States. The Rockefeller
Foundation in New York arranged for Howard Florey and Norman G. Heatley to
travel in July 1941 to meet with Charles Thorn, the US Department of Agriculture’s
chief mycologist. As a result of that trip, thirty-nine separate drug laboratories be-
gan producing penicillin. The United States entered the war later that year when the
Japanese bombed the American fleet in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.
       But by June 1942, the US labs had only enough penicillin available to treat
about ten patients. The urgency of lives being lost in the war meant that production
of penicillin needed to move out of the laboratory and into mass-production. This
was no longer just a scientific endeavor; it required engineering.
       The goals of science and engineering are different. The goal of science is
to discover the truth about the world as it is. The goal of engineering is to create
scalable solutions to problems using science as one tool in that endeavor. Like
engineers, scientists use data to find the truth. They are concerned about reliability
of the data and what the data reveal about general principles by which we understand
our universe. Outlier data are often ignored by scientists as noise. Engineers are
often concerned about outlier data. For example, scientists may be interested in
better understanding the physics of flight. An engineering team, on the other hand,
might want to know exactly what outlier conditions
cause one specific airplane design to crash and for
what reason. Scalable designs require manufacturing
tolerances for parts that eliminate outlier failures.
       Margaret Hutchinson Rousseau was the first
woman to earn a PhD in chemical engineering from
MIT and the first woman to be accepted as a member
of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers.
She oversaw the design of production plants for
strategically important materials during the war,
including synthetic rubber and penicillin.
       Pfizer scientist Jasper H. Kane suggested using
a deep-tank fermentation, a method Pfizer had used
to produce vitamin C. On September 20, 1942, Pfizer
purchased the old Rubel Ice Plant on Marcy Avenue          FIGURE 0.2.
                                                           Margaret Hutchinson Rousseau
in Brooklyn, NY.1 It had the refrigeration equipment
                                                           Credit: Walter P. Reuther Library,
needed and was equipped with fourteen 7,500-gallon
                                                           Archives of Labor and Urban
tanks. Dr. Rousseau worked with a multidisciplinary        Affairs, Wayne State University
8 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     team to turn the Rubel Ice Plant building into the first deep-tank penicillin fermen-
     tation commercial plant. In March 1943, the plant began producing penicillin.
            The process started with a sterile culture of the penicillin mold grown in
     three-liter flasks, then in two-hundred-gallon seed tanks, and finally in one of the
     fourteen 7,500-gallon tanks. Then the drug needed to be extracted from the broth,
     purified, bottled, frozen, and dehydrated. Large quantities of the broth needed to be
     produced because 10,000 parts broth only contained four parts of the drug.2
            By May 1943, deep-tank fermentation produced 400 million units of penicillin.
     In July 1943, the United States War Production Board supported a plan for mass
     distribution of penicillin stocks to Allied troops fighting in Europe. Hutchinson’s
     engineered process and those developed by other engineers such as G. Raymond
     Rettew made it possible for the United States to produce 2.3 million doses in time
     for the invasion of Normandy in the spring of 1944 and over 646 billion units per
     year by June 1945. This engineered process is credited with helping to win the war.
            This story is a victory for both science and engineering.
            To scale innovations for broad use in education and training also requires
     both science and engineering. Learning scientists discover what works in human
     learning, and learning engineering teams develop production models for scaled
     impact. Learning engineering aims to optimize specific learning solutions to under-
     stand under what conditions and with what learners a current design is optimal or
                                    not, and to develop and test alternative more robust, or
                                    more refined, solutions that are more scalable. Just like
                                    with the discovery and production of penicillin, great
                                    advancements in learning can come from a multidisci-
                                    plinary approach that recognizes the value of different
                                    professions and mindsets.


                                                             !""
                                   If you want to learn about learning engineering, a
                                   good place to start is Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. What
                                   was once the steel-making capital of the world is also
                                   arguably the birthplace of, and a focal point for, the
                                   emerging field of learning engineering.
                                         More than fifty years ago, Herb Simon, a
 FIGURE 0.3. World
 War!II poster, “Penicillin        Carnegie Mellon University Professor, coined the term
 Saves Soldiers’ Lives!”           “learning engineering.” 3 Simon, a Nobel Laureate,
                                                    What is learning engineering? | 9



was instrumental in launching departments at the
Pittsburgh-based university that continues to be
a world leader in cognitive and learning sciences,
learning technologies, and the application of the
sciences to optimize human learning.
        Pittsburgh is also home to the Pittsburgh
Science of Learning Center (a.k.a. LearnLab) man-
aged by Carnegie Mellon University and the Uni-
versity of Pittsburgh, and it’s the home of spin-off
businesses developing some of the world’s most in-
novative platforms and solutions for learning.
        While the theoretical idea of learning engi-
                                                       FIGURE 0.4.
neering is over fifty years old, the formal definition Herbert A. Simon
of learning engineering as a professional practice     CC-BY-SA by Richard Rappaport
is still emerging. However, in the pages that follow
you’ll read about teams in Pittsburgh and elsewhere developing exemplary solutions
using learning engineering practices. Their stories paint a picture of what it means
to do learning engineering as a professional practice.


                                       !#"
In 2018, IEEE—the organization that developed the standards behind WiFi and
Bluetooth—established the Industry Connections / Industry Consortium on Learning
Engineering (ICICLE). The group was established to help define and advance the
profession of learning engineering. Participants in ICICLE include experts from
fields of learning sciences, instructional design, learning technology, psychometrics
(an area of study concerned with measurement of knowledge, abilities, attitudes, and
personality traits), learning analytics, user experience design, and other fields.
       Some of the leaders influencing the work of ICICLE have ties to the roots of
learning engineering. People like Ken Koedinger at Carnegie Mellon University can
draw their academic lineage back to Herb Simon, the visionary who coined the term
learning engineering. With ICICLE, Ken co-led the Curriculum Special Interest
Group with Mark Lee. That group began the development of a formal definition of
learning engineering.
       Establishing a clear and concise definition was not easy. Just like today,
some people felt uncomfortable with the words learning and engineering being
used together. Others wondered if learning engineering was unique enough, or if
10 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     it was just a new label for what they already do. The participants debated what
     makes learning engineering unique based on a first draft by Ken, Mark, and Janet
     Kolodner. Before establishing a concise definition, Ken’s group merged with the
     learning engineering Competencies and Credentials Special Interest Group led
     by Jim Goodell and Michael Jay. The combined groups came to consensus on a
     definition that was adopted by ICICLE. That definition is as follows:


     Learning engineering is a process and practice that . . .
        1. applies the learning sciences,
        2. using human-centered engineering design methodologies, and
        3. data-informed decision-making
     . . . to support learners and their development.


     The products of learning engineering are the conditions and experiences under
     which people can achieve great learning outcomes.
            Just like with the discovery and production of penicillin, great advancements
     in learning can come from a multidisciplinary approach that recognizes the value
     of different professions and mindsets. In 2018 and 2019, Janet Kolodner was leading
     ICICLE’s Design for Learning group. Janet is a superstar in the world of the learning
     sciences, having been the founding editor in chief of The Journal of the Learning
     Sciences, a founding executive officer of the International Society of the Learning
     Sciences (ISLS), and a founding program officer of the Cyberlearning and Future
     Learning Technologies program of the National Science Foundation (now called
     RETTL). While leading the ICICLE Design for Learning group, Janet helped launch
     a master’s degree program in learning engineering at Boston College.
            Janet’s group helped develop the idea that learning engineering is often a team
     sport. They recognized the wealth of knowledge and talent in well-developed fields
     of learning experience design. They explored the knowledge, skills, and mindsets
     that were needed for those who design learning experiences and learning systems.
     Then they developed a conceptual model for the kinds of professionals who might
     work with designers to solve learning engineering problems.
            For the 2019 ICICLE Conference, they gave input into a flower diagram with
     petals representing the professional fields that might be part of solving a learning
     engineering problem. Figure 0.5 is a later iteration of that diagram based on input
     from the ICICLE community.
                                                    What is learning engineering? | 11



       In the closing session of that conference, Chris Dede observed that “Learning
engineering is more of a verb than a noun.” (Chris Dede is the Timothy E. Wirth
professor in learning technologies at Harvard Graduate School of Education and ed-
itor of Learning Engineering for Online Education 4 and The 60-Year Curriculum.5 )
       For some challenges, an individual learning engineer with expertise in multi-
ple disciplines might be sufficient. But usually, the big problems to be solved through
learning engineering exceed any one person’s ability. Consider this description of a
learning engineer from the Educause Learning Initiative’s resource, 7 Things You
Should Know About Learning Engineering:

      Learning engineers typically have broad knowledge of engineering
      processes as well as of learning science, computer science, and data
      science. In addition to understanding instructional design, artificial
      intelligence and machine learning, pedagogy, and andragogy, they
      offer skills in systems and user experience design, product testing, and
      the development of policies, regulations, and standards. They leverage
      those skills to create learning experiences, courses, and curricula; define
      educational competencies and assessment standards; and use research
      and data to improve teaching and learning.6

       It’s extremely rare for any one person to have expertise in all of these areas.
Organizations have found it difficult to recruit candidates with such a breadth of
competencies.7 Indeed, it is probably appropriate to refine the Educause definition
by making it a definition of a “learning engineering team” as much as that of an
individual learning engineer.
       Given the multidisciplinary expertise needed on a learning engineering team,
we envision multiple paths to learning engineering talent development. For example,
a person may start with a credential in instructional design or software engineering
and add to that foundation understanding of how people learn. He/she/they may
add to their knowledge and skills by engaging in formal coursework, learning from
others on the team, or participating in workshops put on by other professionals.
Everyone on the learning engineering team doesn’t need to know everything, they
just need to know enough to communicate with the other experts on the team. (See
Chapter 10, Tools for Teaming.)
       As important as talent development for the individuals who will contribute to
a learning engineering team is the development of the team culture, organizational
processes, and a shared vocabulary.
       We’ve observed learning engineering as a team process that builds on
12 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     professional specialties within the engineering team as a coordinated effort rooted in
     a shared understanding and vocabulary. Also, we’ve observed that the application of
     learning engineering generally falls into at least three categories:

           1. Learning engineer as consultant (e.g., teaming with an instructor)
           2. Learning engineer as a member of a team designing learning
              experiences, platforms, resources, or other solutions as a contributor or
              as the lead learning engineer that coordinates across the various other
              specialists and sets the direction for the work to be done
           3. Multiple learning engineering professionals—having a base set of
              common competencies and shared vocabularies for the practice of
              learning engineering while having different roles and areas of expertise

            Different professional practices, work processes, and team dynamics apply to
     each kind of team. In teams with multiple learning engineers, the work may be or-
     ganized by smaller role-based teams that influence decisions about different aspects
     of the iterative design.
            While we’ve observed learning engineering being done by teams of people
     who are not called learning engineers, we’ve also observed an emergence of a distinct
     professional discipline and job title. These engineers have specific competencies
     and mindsets and a specific role in the learning engineering process, just as a
     civil engineer has a specific role in the building of a bridge. Chapter 4, Learning
     Engineering is Engineering, covers some perspectives on engineering professions.
     Other chapters include stories in contexts where “learning engineer” is identified as
     a job title.


                                            !$"
     Located in the culturally diverse East Liberty neighborhood of Pittsburgh’s East End
     is the headquarters for Duolingo, home of the team behind the award-winning lan-
     guage learning platform. It’s no coincidence that the team is located just two miles
     from the Carnegie Mellon University campus where Herb Simon coined the term
     learning engineering. It’s one of several learning technology companies with roots
     in CMU’s Human-Computer Interaction Institute, derived from its Departments of
     Psychology and Computer Science. The company was founded by Carnegie Mellon
     University professor Luis von Ahn and his graduate student Severin Hacker.8
            On a chilly Friday in November, Mark Lee and Jim Goodell met with Burr
                                               What is learning engineering? | 13




                           Data             Software
                          Science          Engineering


                                                                 Learning
           Learning                                             Experience
           Sciences                                               Design



                                  SHARED
     Subject-                  UNDERSTANDING                         Learning
      Matter                                                        Environment
     Expertise                                                      Engineering




         Assessment,                                           Education and
         Measurement,                                             Training
          Evaluation                                           Professionals




                                          NERS
                                        AR
                                                              ERS




                                      LE
                                                          LD
                                                     HO




                                      OT                  E
                                           H E R S TA K
FIGURE 0.5. Learning engineering
teams may require competencies
from multiple domains
CC-BY Jim Goodell




                                            RTA N T D I A G R A                   M
                                      IMP O
14 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



                                                Settles, a former postdoc at Carnegie Mel-
                                                lon University who now leads Duolingo’s
                                                research group, and his colleague Bozena
                                                Pajak, a linguist and learning engineer
                                                who at the time had the title Staff Learn-
                                                ing Scientist and later became Director of
                                                Learning and Curriculum. From the out-
                                                side of the inconspicuous gray building,
                                                you wouldn’t know that this was the world
                                                headquarters of the most popular mobile
 FIGURE 0.6. Bozena Pajak and                   language learning platform, serving over
 Burr Settles at Duolingo                       500 million registered users. (Influenced
                                                by the COVID-19 pandemic, over the
     month of March 2020, new users on Duolingo increased by 101% and learners who
     joined Duolingo during the global pandemic spent 13% more time on Duolingo than
     was typical for new users in the past.9 ) One of the ways in which Duolingo is in-
     novative is in its use of game mechanics to motivate learners. “One of the tricks
     is figuring out how to marry things that are pedagogically sound with things that
     are reinforcing motivators,” Burr told us. To figure these things out, they use engi-
     neering techniques rooted in scientific research. “We run controlled experiments for
     almost everything we change,” he said.10
            This kind of testing and iterative improvement is a common practice among
     practitioners of learning engineering whether the product is an app, course content,
     or changes to a learning environment.
            For every design decision that the Duolingo team makes, they have to consider
     multiple metrics of success. Those metrics include measures of learning, measures
     of user engagement, and how user interactions impact the company’s bottom line.
     They know that to continue to provide free language learning to millions of people
     around the world they need to stay in business. This means that every decision is a
     balance between these metrics. If they can improve one metric without hurting the
     others, they do it.
            The team at Duolingo improves its products through its own scientific re-
     search while applying the scientific discoveries of others. For example, they know
     from prior learning sciences research that when learning new words, the best time to
     practice is when you are on the verge of forgetting.
            “Our approach is based on the spacing effect: the finding that short practices
     spaced out over time is better for learning than ‘cramming.’ A related finding is the
                                                     What is learning engineering? | 15



lag effect: You can learn even better if you gradually increase the spacing between
practices. These ideas go back to 1885, when German psychologist Hermann
Ebbinghaus pioneered the concept of the forgetting curve.” 11
       The science of learning is informed by what we know about how the mind
works. These sciences include: 12

      •   Neuroscience: Biological studies of the nervous system and brain
      •   Cognitive psychology: Study of the human mind through behaviors
      •   Learning sciences: Study of learning in realistic settings
      •   Education research: Models and interventions at the classroom+ level
      •   And others: As well as many other disciplines, such as developmental
          psychology, social psychology, and anthropology 13

       Learning engineering is informed by the combination of what each of these
research traditions has to offer. Learning engineering also can benefit from research
in areas of cognitive and social psychology such as behavioral economics (the
study of psychology as it relates to economic decision-making) that can help us
in understanding learner motivation and engagement. Emerging opportunities in
learning engineering take advantage of biomedical research and development for in-
novations, such as devices that monitor learner attention levels using EEG (electro-
encephalogram) sensors that monitor brain waves. Finally, learning engineering
is increasingly the application of data science—an interdisciplinary field that uses
scientific methods, processes, algorithms and systems to extract knowledge and in-
sights from data. It has been called the “fourth paradigm for scientific exploration.” 14
       Some of these sciences are relatively new. Neuroscience was first recognized
as a unique academic discipline in the 1950s and 1960s,15 cognitive science was
established in the mid-1970s,16 and learning sciences emerged in the 1990s.17 And
yet the pace of discovery has accelerated with the help of innovations like functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and genomic mapping of the brain.18
       Learning science findings applicable to learning engineering include cog-
nitive, noncognitive, and motivational aspects of learning. Environmental and
noncognitive physiological factors are also considered, such as physical health and
safety, relationships, and social contexts.
       Learning engineers are concerned not only with how the brain works in
general, for the average person, but also understanding and empathizing with the
uniqueness of each learner. In The End of Average, Harvard Professor Todd Rose
showed that no one is an “average size.” The size of a person can be measured on
multiple dimensions (height, weight, shoulders, reach, chest, torso, waist, hips, legs).
16 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     To understand a person’s learning and talent development requires measuring many
     more dimensions than those physical attributes of size.

           Just about any meaningful human characteristic—especially talent—
           consists of multiple dimensions. The problem is that when trying to
           measure talent, we frequently resort to the average, reducing our jag-
           ged talent to a single dimension like the score on a standardized test or
           grades or a job performance ranking. But when we succumb to this kind
           of one-dimensional thinking, we end up in deep trouble.19

            Two students could get the exact same set of questions wrong on a test, but for
     different reasons. Promoting robust learning requires addressing those multiple rea-
     sons. Learning engineers ask the why questions to determine the multi-dimensional
     reasons that individuals might or might not master a learning objective under various
     conditions. With insights into possible root-causes, they create and test solutions that
     might overcome those problems.
            Good learning engineers have a deep understanding of how the human brain
     learns and develops: “Because trying to reengineer learning without being versed in
     the basics of learning is like trying to improve brain surgery without knowing much
     about the brain.” 20


                                             !%"
     An engineering design methodology particularly suited to learning engineering is
     called human-centered design, a problem-solving process that begins with empa-
     thetically understanding a challenge that people face and then iteratively developing
     and discovering a best fit solution for a given person or group to meet a specific need
     within a specific context.
            Human-centered design existed as a practice long before it was formalized
     and given a name. In 1894, Will Kellogg used human-centered design to invent a
     breakfast cereal.21 His older brother John Harvey Kellogg was a medical doctor and
     director of a hospital in Battle Creek, Michigan. Will, a former broom salesman,
     moved to Battle Creek to help his brother at the hospital. They had empathy for the
     patients who were struggling to eat toast in the hospital setting. John was a nutrition-
     ist and concerned about the digestibility of his patient’s foods. They wanted to offer
     an alternative. With this need in mind, Will experimented with a pot of boiled wheat
     that he had left out overnight. He rolled it out and baked it. The crispy flakes were
     the first of many iterations over several years to perfect the process. He gave it to
                                                             What is learning engineering? | 17

                                   NER BEHAV
                                 AR




                                          IOR
                              LE
             ASSESSMENT




                                             S
                                                                OR LEAR
                                                            NS F




                                                                                      G
                                                                       NI




                                                                               FE HIN
                                                         TIO                                      SAL




                                                                                       K
                                                                                     AC
                                                                                               AR
                                                                                            HE




                                                                       NG




                                                                                 AC
                                                       DI




                                                                                    B
                                                                                          RE




                                                                                 ED
                                                    CON




                                                                              CO
                                                                                      LIFE EXPERIENCES
                                                                                                 LEARNING EXPERIENCES




                                DESIGN
                                           USER EXPERIENCE


    cognitive        developmental          social                                   learning
                                                               neuroscience
   psychology         psychology          psychology                                 sciences

                          education      motivational            biomedical            data
  anthropology
                          research        research                  R&D               science


FIGURE 0.7. Sciences of learning are a foundation for learning engineering
CC-BY Jim Goodell, 2021




his brother’s patients, confirmed the flakes were easier to eat, and got their feedback
with each iteration. He eventually used corn and invented corn flakes.
       Today human-centered design is used to better match product designs to the
needs of the people who will use them. The process is being used to design every-
thing from software user experiences to entire school districts.22 The process has
been formalized as an international standard (ISO 9241-210) for developing interac-
tive technology, but the concepts are the same even when applied to non-technical
problems. With user-centered design: 23

       1.   Designs use an explicit understanding of users, tasks, and environments
       2.   Users are involved throughout design and development
       3.   The design is driven and refined by user-centered evaluation
       4.   The process is iterative
       5.   The design addresses the whole user experience
       6.   The design team includes multidisciplinary skills and perspectives

      In the case of learning engineering and instructional design, the human-
centered design challenge is for a set of people to learn something. Principles
18 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     and practices of engineering help further define how the work of developing and
     improving learning solutions gets done. Learning engineering combines design
     methodologies with data-driven processes and principles of engineering—such as
     engineering control theory—not typically found in traditional design practices, to
     iterate closer and closer to a best fit solution.
            Deeply understanding the people who will use or benefit from the solution is
     an important idea, whether that solution is a piece of software or something lower
     tech, like a breakfast cereal or, as we discuss below, a new kind of donkey cart.



            Learning engineering is more of a verb than a noun.
                                        – Chris Dede




                                             !&"
     The Duolingo team develops software, but technology isn’t the only product of
     learning engineering. It could be a low-tech learning resource, an improved process,
     a physical environment; anything designed to provide learning experiences and
     conditions for learning that work; anything developed to solve a learning problem.
     Technology is just one of the tools in the learning engineering toolkit. Sometimes
     the needed solution is low tech.
             Shelly Blake-Plock was the founding chair of ICICLE. Shelly is a technical
     genius and the founder and CEO of Yet Analytics, a company that specializes in data
     analysis in support of human learning. But he will be the first to tell you that learn-
     ing engineering is not about the technology, it’s about problem solving in support of
     learning. He saw this firsthand when he visited the West African country of Gambia.
             The problem to be solved was student access to local schools. “In a concerted
     effort to reduce inequity, the government abolished school fees and increased the
     number of communities that have schools within three kilometers from 83 percent
     in 2013 to 95 percent in 2018,” according to a story posted to the World Bank web-
     site.24 However, nearly 30 percent of school-aged children still didn’t attend classes.
     A problem was that a three kilometer walk to school was too far for three- to eight-
     year-old students. Parents were concerned about their children’s safety over the long
     distances.
                                                   What is learning engineering? | 19



       The problem was framed by the context of poorly developed or nonexistent
roads. “Donkeys, a common means of transport in The Gambia, were a natural, yet
innovative, choice,” according to the World Bank article, “and different communities
across the country were enthusiastic about the idea.” Donkey carts were engineered
to carry ten young children each and could be driven by an older student.
       A key strategy in any engineering design is iterative improvement. The low-
tech donkey cart solution used an iterative process. “An initial pilot revealed that
while the original carts were an effective means to transport children to school,
these were too heavy and needed to be redesigned. As a result, a lighter 2.0 model
of the cart was launched in 2015. Built with locally sourced materials, the revamped
carts handle more easily, have a seat for each child, and incorporate important safety
features such as a gate and easy-to-grab handles.” For more on learning engineering
that’s helping people in underdeveloped countries see Chapter 3 for a story about a
team developing a mobile app for people in another West African country, Ghana.
       When Herb Simon first coined the term learning engineering over a half
century ago, the tools of the trade available now didn’t yet exist. Key learning
sciences concepts had yet to be discovered. The most advanced learning technology
outside of academia might have been the rudimentary screen-less flight simulators
being used by the military and commercial airlines to train pilots.25 For academic
classrooms, state-of-the-art technology was the chalkboard, the textbook, overhead
projectors, and the mimeograph machine.
       Today, teams of learning engineers have rich sets of learning sciences and
technology tools that can be applied toward realization of Herb Simon’s vision for
learning engineering. These tools include ubiquitous internet-connected devices,
sophisticated software substrates and development tools, artificial intelligence,
virtual and augmented reality, project-based and collaborative pedagogies, and
online and blended learning modalities. (See Chapter 14, Software and Technology
Standards as Tools.)
       Among the most powerful tools in the learning engineer’s toolbox is the abil-
ity to collect and use data to iteratively improve the learning design and iteratively
improve the solution for any given learner.


                                       !'"
In 1998, Carnegie Mellon University spun off Carnegie Learning, Inc. to support
scaled adoption of cognitive tutors, the kind of intelligent tutoring system developed
through the university’s research. Carnegie Learning’s MATHia offers one-on-one
20 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     tutoring in mathematics covering content for grades 6, 7, 8, Algebra I, Geometry,
     and Algebra II. The intelligent tutoring software presents problems for students to
     solve; it provides feedback to students as they are working through problems based
     on answers given and other data. According to their website, the software “monitors
     the status of the student’s knowledge on a moment-by-moment basis and tailors
     course material, based on these continual assessments.” The twenty-two-year-old
     company merged with New Mountain Learning in 2018.
            While Carnegie Learning doesn’t use the label “learning engineer,” they’re
     doing learning engineering as a “team sport,” bringing together groups of specialists
     to solve problems. A cognitive science team, a data and research team, an instruc-
     tional design team and everyone developing and maintaining the product as a whole
     might be called the “learning engineering team.” They often bring together people
     from the various groups to have “data jams.” When the data scientists discover a
     case where the data are telling them that something is not working for a subset of
     students, they call a team meeting in which everyone works together to find the root
     cause of the problem and suggest possible solutions.
            Groups that participate in “data jams” don’t all need to understand data sci-
     ence, but “they certainly need to basically understand how to think about data,”
     Steve Ritter told Jodi Lis, Mark Lee, and Jim Goodell when they visited Carnegie
     Learning’s Pittsburgh headquarters in 2018.
            Ritter’s team builds tools to support the non-data-scientists on the team. “They
     use the tools to try to figure out how to improve instruction, and we use the tools to
     figure out what this data means,” he said, “is there a better way to sort the world, to
     figure out what’s really going on?”
            Michael Sandbothe, the lead programmer on data tools at the time, worked
     to make it so the end users need the least amount of high-level data science skills.
     “You don’t need a PhD in statistics to use the tool,” he said. Stephen Fancsali, a
     research scientist on the team, might find an inconsistency in the data but does not
     know what’s happening. Why are students able to answer one mathematics prob-
     lem but not able to answer one just like it? The instructional design teams, former
     mathematics teachers, and other content experts have insights that the data scientist
     might not have. They might say, “Here’s what’s really happening, the students are
     confused about this.” These kinds of insights become hypotheses that the research
     team can test against the data. More insights from Carnegie Learning and others on
     data-informed decisions are available in Chapter 6.
            Continuously examining the data to discover how to make a product or solu-
     tion better for learning is a key part of the learning engineering process. The method
                                                    What is learning engineering? | 21



for deciding what data to collect and how it will be collected is called “instrumenta-
tion,” and is covered in Chapter 5.


                                        !("
If you use Duolingo to learn a new language, the app can predict your future. After
you’ve been introduced to a new word and had some practice with it, the app can pre-
dict whether or not you will have forgotten it at some point in the future. To predict
the future, it doesn’t use a crystal ball, it uses data and a scientific discovery made
more than a century ago.
       In 1879, German psychologist Hermann Ebbinghaus was curious about how
memory worked. He created experiments to test how well he could recall new words.
He knew that he would be influenced by prior knowledge if he used real words, so
he created a list of nonsense syllables composed of three letters (a consonant on each
end and a vowel in the middle). He eliminated syllables that sounded like or were
parts of real words (for example, BOL or PED, respectively). Then he tested himself
by randomly looking at a sequence of cards with the nonsense syllables, writing
them in a notebook, and then trying to recall the list.26
       In 1885, he published findings about the learning curve, how fast people learn
new facts, and the forgetting curve, how fast people forget what they’ve learned.27
His discoveries about the forgetting curve are the basis of Duolingo’s ability to pre-
dict your future.
       Additional research over the last century has led to a more complete scientific
understanding about the spacing effect,28 the finding that people are more likely to
remember something if they spread out the learning over time rather than cramming
by trying to learn it all at once. In the case of learning a new language, newly intro-
duced and more difficult words should be reviewed more frequently, and older or less
difficult words should be reviewed less frequently.
       Another phenomenon, the lag effect, is that people commit information to
long-term memory better if the time between study or practice increases gradually.
Yet other research showed that the best time for people to practice is right before
they’re about to forget something. Spaced repetition models try to figure out when
the best times are to review or practice specific facts or skills.29
       Duolingo’s Burr Settles and a former Duolingo employee, Brendan Meeder,
who later moved to Uber’s Advanced Technologies Group, developed a “trainable
spaced repetition model.” It’s software that uses data and artificial intelligence to
learn the best time to have people practice specific words in a new language that
22 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     they’re learning. This model used by Duolingo isn’t the first of the so-called for-
     getting functions, but it’s a new approach that uses modern machine learning tech-
     niques. It takes in data about a student’s practice history (when they practiced and
     whether or not they remembered correctly) and data that helps the machine learning
     algorithm know how difficult a word is to memorize compared to other words. More
     insights from Duolingo are found throughout this book.
            Like Margaret Hutchinson Rousseau and the engineering team at Pfizer, they
     took a scientific discovery and engineered a solution that helps hundreds of millions
     of people. Using data and a century-old scientific discovery, Duolingo can person-
     alize and optimize your learning of a new language—by predicting your future, for
     example, knowing when you’re likely to forget a word.
• Learning engineers and learning engineering teams apply the learning
  sciences using engineering design processes and data-informed
  decision-making to create the conditions for optimal learning.

• Engineering is di!erent from science. Learning scientists discover what
  works in human learning. Learning engineers aim to optimize particular
  learning experiences, test di!erent options, and build scalable solutions.

• Learning engineering is often a team process that brings together
  professionals from di!erent fields, including the learning sciences,
  assessment, learning experience design, software engineering, and data
  science. Team members don’t need to be experts in all areas.

• Technology is a tool that can help scale the implementation of learning
  experiences. It also enables data-informed decision-making. However,
  learning solutions don’t necessarily require advanced technology.

• Learning engineers design learning experiences, but that’s not all they
  do. They also address the contexts and conditions that lead to great
  learning. These might include the architecture of physical or virtual
  learning environments, social structures, learners’ mindsets, and habits
  of practice as well as more obvious targets, such as curriculum design,
  educational technology development, and learning analytics.

• Learning engineers don’t design for the “average” student; they engineer
  adaptations and variations to fit real people and sometimes even
  individual learners’ needs.

• Data instrumentation and analysis are critical to learning engineering.
  They inform an iterative process of creation, implementation, and
  investigation. Data can help optimize learning activities and feedback,
  such as Duolingo’s trainable spaced repetition model.

• Learning engineers keep in mind the science of how people learn and
  how people are motivated to learn.

• Learning engineering takes a systemic view of learners’ broad
  experiences, including the life experiences that impact their learning.




                                           WHAT IS LEARNING ENGINEERING?

                    KEY POINTS
24 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Endnotes
     1 Sharkey, John, Donald Clark, Anne O’Brien, and Yorke Rhodes. “History of the New York Section
       Committee: 2008 Annual Report.” www.newyorkacs.org/reports/NYACSReport2008/
       pfizerlandmark.html
     2 Ginsberg, Judah. Development of Deep Tank Fermentation Commemorative Booklet. Pfizer
       Inc., 2008. www.acs.org/content/dam/acsorg/education/whatischemistry/landmarks/penicillin/
       development-of-deep-tank-fermentation-commemorative-booklet.pdf
     3 Simon, Herbert A. “Job of a college president.” Educational Record 48, no. 1 (1967): 68–78.
     4 Dede, Christopher J., John Richards, and Bror Saxberg, eds. Learning Engineering for Online
       Education: Theoretical Contexts and Design-Based Examples. New York: Routledge, 2018.
     5 Dede, Christopher J., and John Richards. The 60-Year Curriculum: New Models for Lifelong
       Learning in the Digital Economy. New York: Routledge, 2020.
     6 Educause. 7 Things You Should Know About Learning Engineering. Philadelphia, PA: Educause,
       2018. https://library.educause.edu/-/media/files/library/2018/9/eli7160.pdf
     7 Mitchell Bonnett, comments made during meeting of the IEEE Learning Technology Standards
       Committee Meeting in Alexandria, VA, August 27, 2018.
     8 Wikipedia. “Duolingo.” Last modified December 9, 2021. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duolingo
     9 Blanco, Cindy. “Changes in Duolingo Usage During the COVID-19 Pandemic.” Duolingo Blog,
       April 8, 2020. https://blog.duolingo.com/changes-in-duolingo-usage-during-the-covid-19-
       pandemic
     10 Goodell, Jim, Mark Lee, and Jodi Lis. “What We Discovered at the Roots of Learning
        Engineering.” In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Learning Engineering, Arlington, VA,
        2019. New York: IEEE. https://sagroups.ieee.org/icicle/wp-content/uploads/sites/148/2020/07/
        ICICLE_Proceedings_Learning-Engineering.pdf
     11 Settles, Burr. “How We Learn How You Learn.” Duolingo Blog, March 16, 2020. https://blog.
        duolingo.com/how-we-learn-how-you-learn
     12 Willcox, Karen E., Sanjay Sarma, and Philip H. Lippel. Online Education: A Catalyst for Higher
        Education Reforms. Cambridge: MIT, 2016. https://oepi.mit.edu/files/2016/09/MIT-Online-
        Education-Policy-Initiative-April-2016.pdf
        Fusco, Judi, Jeremy Roschelle, and Pati Ruiz. “What is Learning Sciences and Why Does It
        Matter?” Digital Promise Blog, March 10, 2020. https://digitalpromise.org/2020/03/10/what-is-
        learning-sciences-and-why-does-it-matter
     13 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. How People Learn II: Learners,
        Contexts, and Cultures. National Academies Press, 2018. https://doi.org/10.17226/24783
     14 Hey, Tony, Stewart Tansley, and Kristin Tolle, eds. The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive
        Scientific Discovery. United States: Microsoft Research, 2009. www.microsoft.com/en-us/
        research/wp-content/uploads/2009/10/Fourth_Paradigm.pdf
     15 Wikipedia, “History of Neuroscience.” Last modified November 4, 2021.
        https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_neuroscience
     16 Thagard, Paul. “Cognitive Science.” In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Stanford, CA:
        Stanford University, 2018. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/cognitive-science
     17 Kolodner, Janet L. “The Journal of the Learning Sciences: Effecting Changes in Education.” The
        Journal of the Learning Sciences 1, no. 1 (1991): 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327809jls0101_1
     18 “Allen Brain Map.” Allen Institute for Brain Science, 2021. http://portal.brain-map.org
                                                          What is learning engineering? | 25



19 Rose, Todd. The End of Average: How We Succeed in a World That Values Sameness. New York:
   HarperOne, 2016.
20 Hess, Frederick M., and Bror Saxberg. Breakthrough Leadership in the Digital Age: Using
   Learning Science to Reboot Schooling. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin, 2014.
21 Thomsen, Dave. “Why Human-Centered Design Matters.” Wired (Insights), December 2013.
   www.wired.com/insights/2013/12/human-centered-design-matters
22 “How Can Design Advance Learning and Education?” IDEO, 2021.
   www.ideo.com/question/how-can-design-advance-education
23 Travis, David. “ISO 13407 Is Dead. Long Live ISO 9241-210!” Userfocus (Article), June 6, 2011.
   www.userfocus.co.uk/articles/iso-13407-is-dead.html
24 Grimsland, Alison M. “How Donkey ‘School Buses’ Benefit Early Grade Children in the
   Gambia.” World Bank Blogs, May 29, 2018. https://blogs.worldbank.org/education/how-donkey-
   school-buses-benefit-early-grade-children-gambia
25 “Lufthansa Full Flight Simulators.” ProFlight. www.proflight.com/en
26 Wikipedia. “Hermann Ebbinghaus.” Last modified December 2, 2021. https://en.wikipedia.org/
   wiki/Hermann_Ebbinghaus
27 “Ebbinghaus, Hermann.” In Encyclopedia.com. Last modified August 13, 2018.
   www.encyclopedia.com/people/medicine/psychology-and-psychiatry-biographies/hermann-
   ebbinghaus
28 Ebbinghaus, Hermann. Memory: A Contribution to Experimental Psychology. Translated by Henry
   A. Ruger and Clara E. Bussenius. New York: Teachers College, Columbia University, 2013.
   http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/Ebbinghaus/index.htm
29 Tabibian, Behzad, Utkarsh Upadhyay, Abir De, Ali Zarezade, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Manuel
   Gomez-Rodriguez. “Enhancing Human Learning via Spaced Repetition Optimization.” In
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116, no. 10 (2019): 3988–3993.
   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1815156116
FOUNDATIONS
  ESSENTIAL CONCEPTS IN LEARNING ENGINEERING
CHAPTER 1


Learning Engineering
is a Process
by Aaron Kessler, Scotty D. Craig, Jim Goodell,
Dina Kurzweil, and Scott W. Greenwald




Learning engineering is a process and practice that applies
the learning sciences using human-centered engineering
design methodologies and data-informed decision-
making to support learners and their development.



A process is a series of actions or steps taken in order to achieve a particular end.

A process has:
     1. inputs
     2. process steps
     3. outputs

       Baking chocolate chip cookies is a process defined by a recipe. It has inputs
(the ingredients), action steps (directions), and outputs (the cookies). Baking one
batch of cookies is a project. The recipe defines a repeatable process that may be
iteratively adjusted and improved.
       Learning engineering is also a repeatable process intended to iteratively de-
sign, test, adjust, and improve conditions for learning. It starts with a challenge.
The scale of that challenge could be small and focused, such as the need to prepare
students for a class of difficult problems on a high-stakes test (see Chapter 6), the
scale may be the design of a global learning platform serving education in a whole
variety of disciplines for millions of students (Chapter 4), or the scale could be of
any size in between. The nature of the challenge could be about teaching adults to


DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-5
This chapter has been made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license.
30 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     adopt healthy behaviors (Chapter 3) or motivating middle school students to engage
     in more productive learning behaviors (Chapter 6). It could be about tactical training
     for teams of soldiers (Chapter 5) or ethical training for medical professionals or any
     other learning context (Chapter 7).
            True stories featured throughout this book demonstrate the wide variety of
     challenges addressed with the learning engineering process, such as the following:

           • Optimizing learner experiences on a global language learning platform
             (Introduction, Chapter 5, and Chapter 6)
           • Getting kids to where they’ll be learning in West Africa (Introduction)
           • Designing curricula and professional development and scaling a new
             learning technology for broad use (Introduction and Chapter 6)
           • Developing software for a collaborative VR experience to help learners
             understand a complex scientific concept (Chapter 1)
           • Designing numeracy games for two- to three-year-olds (Chapter 3)
           • Designing for low literacy users and in humanitarian settings (Chapter 3)
           • Engineering a global learning platform serving 3,000 university-level
             courses to about thirty-three million students (Chapter 4)
           • Providing the right level and frequency of feedback (Chapter 4)
           • Designing sensors for learning analytics for military training (Chapter 5)
           • Designing game-based learning for four- and five-year-olds (Chapter 5)
           • Developing a platform for collecting learning analytics from game-based
             learning (Chapter 5)
           • Discovering with a multidisciplinary team why results from a formative
             assessment delivered immediately following online instruction yield a
             poor pass rate (Chapter 6)
           • Designing simulated training for medical professionals (Chapter 7)

            Additional examples are provided as visions for the future of learning engi-
     neering (Chapter 19) and in supplementary case studies. As the contexts and needs
     for learning change, the learning engineering process has the potential to address
     future challenges that we cannot imagine today.
                                                Learning Engineering is a Process | 31




                                                             TE
                                                                AM
                         S
                      ER
                                                                 CREATION
                  N
               AR

                                                              including designing,
            LE



                                                            building solutions, data
                                                                instrumentation,
                                                             implementation plans



                                    CHALLENGE
                                     Understand the
                                  opportunity to improve
   INVESTIGATION                   learning or learning
    with data analysis                  conditions




                                                       IMPLEMENTATION
                                                           with data collection




                                      CONTE X T




FIGURE 1.1. The learning engineering process
CC-BY Aaron Kessler




                                         !!"
In 2020, Aaron Kessler of MIT’s Open Learning led development of a draft learning
engineering process model with the Design for Learning Special Interest Group of
the IEEE Industry Connections / Industry Consortium on Learning Engineering
(ICICLE). This chapter presents the next iteration of that model that considers the
parts concurrently as a cycle, with a challenge at the center. The chapter also provides
a concrete example of how the process was used at MIT to develop a VR learning
32 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     experience called the Electrostatic Playground.
            Figure 1.1 shows a high-level view of the process. It starts with a challenge (an
     opportunity to create or improve learning conditions) and follows with investigation,
     creation, and implementation of a solution. The exact order and specific work to
     be done will vary based on the nature and scale of the challenge and other factors.
     However, the learning engineering process always involves multiple iterations, and
     it always uses data to inform decisions.
            The outcomes that can be achieved by engaging in this process are broad.
     Therefore, the model is designed to work across a multitude of settings, levels of ed-
     ucation and training, kinds of challenges, and groups of people. The specific process
     will vary based on the challenge, learner context, team context, available resources,
     and other factors. Specific processes used by a large team may be different from or
     the same as those used by a small team, and the process for developing a simulation
     may be different from the process for designing a project-based learning experience.
            In this chapter, we use the example of a learning solution developed at MIT.
     This is just one example; the other examples throughout the rest of the book offer
     other kinds of challenges that can be addressed by using the learning engineering
     process. Despite these differences, the core of the process represented in Figure 1.1
     is seen throughout these examples and can help those hoping to engage in learning
     engineering to organize their work in purposeful ways.


                                             !""
     Challenge
     Learning engineering always begins with a challenge or problem associated with
     learners and learning. The inputs required to identify the challenge can come from
     many different sources. For example, a new challenge may come to light based on
     data from a previous cycle of the learning engineering process. The challenge may
     be a changed environment or business process that requires new learning for people
     in the workforce. Challenges can be noticed as new learners join a community with
     different needs requiring changes to the status quo. The opportunity to improve
     learning might address a topic known to be challenging within a field or domain of
     teaching and learning.
            Regardless of how the challenge is illuminated, understanding the challenge
     (or the problem you are trying to solve) includes understanding the learning objec-
     tives, the learner(s), and the conditions that will hinder or help learners reach the
                                                  Learning Engineering is a Process | 33




            + +            + +     + + ++
                                              Electrostatic Playground
    +
        +
                                          +   Challenge
   +                                      +
                           −
                           −− − − − − −
   +
                       −                 Electrostatics is the branch of physics
    +                  −
                      −
      +
                  −−
                    −−−                  concerned with electric charges at rest, and
                                         it is typically covered in the introductory
                     − − − −−
                  +          −−−
                +                −       physics curriculum. Many students lack
                +
                  + + + +
                             + +
                                         familiarity with the concepts since they are
                                         difficult to directly observe or visualize in
                                         the real world. Within electrostatics, Gauss’
    FIGURE 1.2. Two-dimensional
                                         Law is one of the most challenging topics,
    electrostatics diagram
                                         largely because it is fundamentally 3D, and
                                         therefore difficult to imagine or to capture
                                         in 2D whiteboard sketches. A further con-
sequence of this is that it impedes instructors and learners from jointly attending to
interactions (for example, sharing experiences of asking questions or checking for
understanding) around the phenomena. One potential solution to this problem is to
use 3D representations in a digital environment, using, for example, VR.
        The Electrostatic Playground project set out to provide students opportunities
to engage with electrostatic representations in a VR environment. In this project
the main challenge to be addressed in the learning engineering process was to get
students to collaboratively engage with electrostatics representations in ways that
produced key insights about basic principles of physics.



targeted goal. As in other engineering disciplines, learning engineering does not
start with a solution looking for a problem, rather the key to the process is to thor-
oughly understand the challenge before seeking solutions.
       The Electrostatic Playground project is small compared to some projects. It
focuses on a limited set of learning objectives for introductory physics students in a
specific university course with access to VR equipment. Regardless of the size of the
work, defining the challenge to be addressed is central to the work. (Chapter 8 offers
tools for understanding the challenge.) It is also critical to realize that challenges
are not static or self-contained, in fact, it is highly likely that to address a challenge
you must address a set of sub-challenges. If the primary challenge is to develop
a learning experience, sub-challenges include the need to develop instrumentation
and plan implementation along with sub-challenges related to developing and itera-
tively improving the learning objects themselves. New sub-challenges will arise as
the process is followed, for example, testing a prototype may identify new problems
34 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     to be solved to fully address the primary challenge.
            In the case of the Electrostatic Playground example, a sub-challenge involved
     the limited ways the typical VR system logged data about user activity; often a
     single “eye in the sky” structure is used (like a single video camera looking down
     on the action instead of separate cameras showing all points of view). Because the
     project was concerned with collaboration between participants, data limitations had
     to be addressed to investigate potential collaborative learning experiences. Lacking
     such data would limit opportunities to understand the impact of the designed solu-
     tion and hinder future rounds of improvement. These multiple levels and types of
     challenges are often the hallmark of work that can be addressed using the learning
     engineering process.


                                             !#"
     Challenges to be solved using the learning engineering process do not occur in black
     boxes, instead they are situated within specific contexts. The context circle (dotted
     line in the learning engineering model diagram) encompasses the defined challenge
     and the entire process and is intended to be an outer bound for two main contextual-
     ized groups, learners and the learning engineering team.


     Learners
     Learning is situated. This means that learners in different situations, with different
     resources, learning conditions, and backgrounds will interact with each other and
     with resources very differently. This will lead to different learning experiences and
     outcomes. The learning context includes:

           •   People (learners, teachers, tutors, other learners, and others supporting)
           •   Environment(s) (virtual or physical)
           •   Learner backgrounds and prior knowledge
           •   Cultural norms for learners’ home, community, and learning community
           •   Available tools
           •   Everything about the population of learners and potential learning
               conditions that may help or hinder the learning

           The stories in Chapter 3 highlight the stark differences in learner contexts that
     must be considered when developing solutions to learning engineering challenges.
     For example, developing effective online learning activities for two- to three-year-old
                                               Learning Engineering is a Process | 35



Electrostatic Playground: Learner Context
The learners were first-year introductory physics students who were well versed in
using mathematical formulas to represent and solve physics problems in a stepwise
process. However, most had minimal prior experience engaging with visualizations
or representations of electrostatics-based phenomena to develop more conceptual
understandings. The project partially aimed to address this by having students
engage with the content and other students in a VR environment. In this course
students work on problem sets throughout the semester with the same group of two
or three students, and many opted to sign up for the VR session with these part-
ners. This meant that the students were accustomed to communicating and problem
solving with their VR session compatriots. Thus, the work associated with learning
community norms was something established in the traditional class work and was
able to be leveraged in the context of the VR setting. Finally, the VR environment
was constrained to focus only on a small set of learning goals, meaning learners
engaged with the proposed VR implementation would not be exploring other phys-
ics phenomena at the same time.




children is very different from designing activities for four- and five-year-olds and
completely different from designing simulated hospital settings for helping medical
students learn new procedures. These, in turn, are quite different from educating low
literacy learners in developing nations. Also see Chapter 2, Learning Engineering
Applies the Learning Sciences, for insights on how people learn and the science
applicable to contextual conditions for learning.


Team
Challenges that must be solved using the learning engineering process are highly
complex and often require a team of people in order to develop appropriate solutions.
Learning engineering teams bring together specialists in the realms of education,
technology, and training to address a challenge.
      Large teams may use different processes or the same ones used by small teams.
The value of these teams does not lie entirely in their current individual abilities, but
also in the team’s ability to grow, develop together, and address the complex chal-
lenge collaboratively. A shared disposition toward growth and improvement, when
combined with the shared knowledge of the team, makes the solving of learning
engineering challenges possible. This team-oriented approach is recognized as a
36 | Learning Engineering Toolkit                                     CONTE
                                                                               X T CIR
                                                                                         CLE


                              RS                         TEA
                          R NE                              M
                         A
                      LE         (contextually situated)


     FIGURE 1.3. Learning engineering process detail: learners, teams, and context



     common practice for the development of e-learning in the corporate training do-
     main.
            Learning engineering as a team process builds on professional specialties
     within the engineering team through a coordinated effort rooted in a shared
     understanding and vocabulary. The learning engineering flower graphic (Figure
     0.5 on page 13) shows professional domains that might be required to address a
     learning engineering challenge. The professionals on the team require some shared
     understanding of the challenge and enough understanding about the other domains
     to effectively communicate as a team. (See Chapter 10, Tools for Teaming, for more
     discussion on learning engineering teams.) Learners and other stakeholders might
     also be considered part of the team.


     Context
     The context circle is meant to be a reminder to those engaging in the learning engi-
     neering process that these two groups, learners and the learning engineering team,
     are situated in contexts that will have norms, expectations, affordances, and lim-
     itations that will need to be taken into account as work on the central challenge is
     carried out.


                                            !$"
     Creation
     Moving to the outer portion of the process from the central challenge is not a one-
     size-fits-all proposition. Depending on some of the contextual factors discussed
     above, a team working to address a challenge may be able to begin their work in any
                                               Learning Engineering is a Process | 37



Electrostatic Playground: Team Context
The Electrostatic Playground project was initiated and led by a research scientist
in human-computer interaction with a focus on learning sciences and a prior
background in mathematics and physics. The project scope grew to involve a team
that included subject-matter experts, VR systems developers, and educational
researchers. The subject matter experts contributed on three levels:

      (a) suggesting technical (software implementation) approaches,
      (b) suggesting component user experiences (tools
          and corresponding visualizations), and
      (c) providing guidance on sca!olding for curriculum alignment
          (narrative segments and corresponding exploratory activities).

The primary subject-matter expert was an instructor familiar with simulation tech-
niques (relevant here because a simulation-based, exploratory experience is being
designed) who could therefore contribute on all three levels. Three other course
instructors also contributed to the last two areas (b and c). Six teaching assistants
were recruited to participate just in category (c), first by holding live office hours in
the multiuser VR space, and after gaining experience with that, structuring recorded
narratives with suggested activities that aligned specifically with elements of the
course curriculum. All of the subject matter experts were responsible for implement-
ing the learning environment with students.
       The VR systems developers, including the project lead and two software en-
gineers, handled the detailed user experience design and software implementation,
including the physics simulation (with guidance from the primary subject matter
expert), building the environment, creating usable data structures, conducting user
testing, and supporting the final implementation with students. During the process
they were able to contribute original component user experiences, which could then
be validated and integrated by the instructors.
       Finally, the educational researchers (a senior learning scientist and an
undergraduate intern) were responsible for providing feedback on how the data
collected during the implementation could be analyzed, engaging in reflection on
results in connection with stated goals of the work, and connecting data outputs
with potential changes to the user experience and sca!olded curriculum for the
next round of implementation.
Electrostatic Playground: Creation
Early on, the team identified the topics of electric flux and Gauss’ Law as good matches
for the technology. They’re topics that students have difficulty with (and therefore would
represent an opportunity for clear benefit), and the relevant conceptual constructs are
particularly 3D in nature (difficult to explain in 2D and requiring 3D mental manipulations).
       On this basis, the learning engineering team discussed how they could leverage the
a!ordances of VR to encourage joint collaboration among students as they explored field
lines and Gaussian surfaces. This collective team structure allowed for the concurrent
development of the learning experience and VR system to capture students’ actions and
attention in ways that could inform iterative improvement later in the cycle.
       After an initial round of development with the subject-matter experts describing
critical features that students should attend to, the developers coded those ideas into
a usable form in the system, and then a series of user tests was conducted. Graduate
students, sta!, and other subject-matter experts were asked to engage with the system
while designers, developers, and a researcher observed.
       The initial design, which included both technology and interaction design elements,
was meant to be a sandbox where learners would be introduced to the tools available in
the system and allowed to freely explore features and relationships among objects. This
system was piloted in a live tutorial setting, with teaching assistants instructing one or two
students directly in the environment without a specific script or lesson plan. Beyond the
observation of the test, data were collected in the form of a playable recording that could
replay the session in 3D, either immersively (in VR) or non-immersively (on a desktop PC).
       Two key actions resulted from this user test. First, across the team everyone agreed
that a series of short instructor-led prompts, to partially guide and get learners started in
the exploring and noticing of critical features, needed to be created by the subject-matter
experts. The resulting explanatory components of the learning experience took the form
of mini-lectures recorded by an instructor within the VR system and played back by the
learners as they begin each learning segment. These mini-lectures would end with the
prompt, “Now it’s your turn,” from the instructor, indicating that the learners should begin
exploring the interactive elements. This explanatory-exploratory structure was repeated
with several cycles of consecutive prompts before learners were given a final opportunity
to engage in free exploration of the environment.
       Second, the learning engineering team noted that the third-person perspective
associated with the session recordings made it difficult to observe when and where
learners were exhibiting joint attention to objects. As a result, the developers recommend-
ed adjusting the VR system to allow for spatial recording. This technique allows viewers
to adopt any perspective, but for the purposes of efficiently seeing what each learner was
attending to, the first-person perspective was the most advantageous.
       This decision to instrument the system to capture the learning experiences from
each student’s perspective would later turn out to be incredibly valuable in understanding
when and how learners had aha! moments. Had the team not been working collaboratively
and concurrently on these parts of the process, it’s likely that the process would have,
at best, been extended, and given the nature of the questions and ideas raised in the
collaborative meetings, the resulting VR experience may have looked very di!erent.
                                              Learning Engineering is a Process | 39



one of the outer action steps of the process. For
the purposes of this chapter, we start with the
creation step; however, teams might begin with
implementation and or investigation depending
on the challenge established at the beginning of
the process and the context in which they are
                                                       FIGURE 1.4. Playback from the
working.                                               Electrostatic Playground VR
       The creation portion of the process con-
tains several key mini and iterative cycles of the learning engineering process that
include designing, developing, instrumenting, and user testing potential solutions.
Remember that these are happening simultaneously. For example, a simple paper
prototype (creation) may be tested (implementation) with a small focus group to
collect initial data for checking suitability of a design (investigation).
       A key feature of the creation portion of the process is that the mini-processes
should be considered concurrently rather than sequentially. This concurrent work
requires the person or people working to solve the challenge to engage in the work
of creation in cycles that take into account:

      1. What’s known from the learning sciences literature that can inform the
         designed solution (Chapter 2)
      2. Human-centered and engineering practices to improve initial design
         into a viable solution that will function as intended in the contextualized
         operating conditions (Chapter 3 and Chapter 4)
      3. How data related to targeted learning can be collected and analyzed
         (Chapter 5 and Chapter 6), both to support learning and as feedback for
         refining the solution
      4. How values and ethics are embedded within the design and
         implementation process (Chapter 7)

        In many current settings, especially within education technology companies,
each of these sets of mini-processes is completed independently. For example, a
designer creates a set of specs that are handed to the development team, who builds
a solution that is handed off to the implementation team, who collects data and hands
it off to the data scientist, and so on. The Electro VR example provides a view into
how the learning engineering process can bring these sometimes disparate mini-
processes together into a Lean-Agile or concurrent, and potentially more coherent,
creation process. (See also Chapter 11, Lean-Agile Development Tools.)
40 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




                                                !%"
     Implementation
     Once a potential solution to the learning engineering challenge has been created, the
     process shifts to focus on implementation. As discussed earlier in the chapter, the
     context of the learners and how they will be supported in their specific environment
     must be initially considered as you define the challenge, and implementation planning
     must be part of the concurrent work done in the creation phase. The implementation
     phase of the learning engineering process involves having real learners in real
     contexts engage with the output from the creation stage. Implementation is not
     limited to full release or full-scale implementation of a product or solution.
            Note that the Electrostatic Playground context allowed for a comparatively
     straightforward implementation: Subject-matter experts, who were also the instruc-
     tors of the course in which the system was implemented, along with their teaching
     assistants for the course, who were also the user testers, enacted the instructional
     plan and facilitated the VR experience. This may or may not be the case for other
     learning engineering contexts.
            When an implementation is more wide-ranging, usually later in the iterative




                                                                                           Creation

                                                                     Mini-iterations for
                                                  Investigation         creation of:
                                                                    Learning Solutions
                                                                  Learning Experiences
                                                                   Learning Conditions
                                                                      Instrumentation
                                                                  Implementation Plans




                                                                            User Testing



                         CREATION
                       including designing,
                     building solutions, data
                         instrumentation,
                      implementation plans




     FIGURE 1.5. Learning engineering process detail: the creation cycle
                                               Learning Engineering is a Process | 41



process, it is often fraught with difficulties and complexity. Even at a slightly larger
scale there can be complexity. For example, in a project that implemented robotics-
based proportional reasoning tutoring systems, implementation and testing was
done across just three different school settings with three different educators.1 Each
educator operationalized and enacted the system in a different way, leading to mixed
results. Much of the complexity came from differences in the specific learning goals
that each of the educators hoped to address. Implementation and testing generally
become more complex in each iteration as venues and teachers or facilitators are
added, requiring more focus on details of implementations and their similarities
to and differences from what was expected as more variation is added. In fact,
understanding how systems are implemented and the impacts of such work could
be a separate learning engineering challenge that must be addressed. (See Chapter
16, Implementation Tools.) Thus, the work of understanding and accounting for the
implementation during the creation (or improvement) phase of the process is critical.



Electrostatic Playground: Implementation
The first implementation involved a group of first-year physics students engaging
with the system as part of their coursework. Ultimately twenty-three students par-
ticipated in what the instructor called an optional part of the course that could help
reinforce their understanding of electric flux and Gauss’s Law. The implementation
took place shortly before final exams. The students who participated in some cases
had already understood the concepts well when they were initially introduced, while
other students were hoping to understand these concepts more fully the second
time around. Using the explanatory-exploratory structure described above, student
groups engaged with each of the three learning segments and the final open-ended
exploration time. The total time to complete the experience lasted around an hour,
and no group went over one hour and fifteen minutes in the environment.




                                        !&"
Investigation
Having implemented the solution and collected data, the work of processing, ana-
lyzing, and interpreting the outcome can be done. In some instances, this part of the
process might begin as soon as the very first learners are done engaging with the
42 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     created experience or system; in other instances, hundreds of learners will need to
     finish work before this part of the process can begin. Much of the analysis process
     will be dependent on the knowledge and skills of the team members engaged in the
     work. In most instances the use of qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-method ap-
     proaches to data analysis are likely appropriate and each analysis will have different
     timelines for when actionable interpretations can be produced back to the larger
     team. (See Chapters 5 and 6 for more details of how data instrumentation and anal-
     ysis apply to learning engineering.)
            In some instances, the results can feed directly back to the implementation
     group to support learner engagement, while in others the results will inform the
     next round of design and improvement of the experience or system, and in yet
     other instances the results will show positive outcomes for the challenge while
     highlighting other challenges within the same context. It’s also important to note
     that sometimes the results are inconclusive, unclear, or simply more data are needed
     to verify results. In these instances, the learning engineering team may decide to
     rerun the implementation without making any changes. In some instances, the team
     may make small adjustments based on results but keep the system mostly the same
     to implement with more learners or just in a new context that they believe the already
     designed solution will work.


                                              !'"
     Completing the Loop
     Completing a loop of the learning engineering process means feeding what was
     learned back into other parts of the cycle to improve the work continually and it-
     eratively. The learning engineering process is intended to allow people or teams
     continually and purposefully to address complex learning challenges in ways that
     are informed by results and improve over time. Such iterative attention to detail is
     critical in designing learning solutions that work as intended for the many different
     situations in which a solution will be implemented.
            While the learning engineering process is intended to be a way to focus on
     the central challenge, it is likely foolish to think that only one challenge will need to
     be worked on at a time, especially in business or large-scale settings. Although the
     people and teams working on an individual learning engineering process should be
     highly integrated and focused on the central challenge, the reality of most settings
     is that a “single challenge” will be connected with or nested within dozens of
Electrostatic Playground: Data Story
Data from each of the learner sessions were captured using an approach that was
fully integrated with the software. During sessions, the system captured audio from
the microphone of each participant (integrated with the headset) and logged all
activity within the interactive environment, including the movement of the headsets and
controllers and controller-based object interactions. Using the corresponding data logs,
the system could play back the entire session either in VR or on a 2D screen, including
audio, for further analysis.
        While the data allowed for recordings of the sessions to be played back from the
perspective of each participant, the learning engineering team found it difficult to encode
the data. It was challenging keep track of each participant’s actions and also complicated
to structure the data in a way that would allow for exploration from both single participant
and multiple participant (i.e., joint attention) perspectives. Further, no existing data
coding platform allowed for easy coding of such recording data structures (mostly due
to file format limitations). As such, the learning engineering team needed to address the
issue of coding the data in a manageable and useful way. The VR system developers
were tasked with creating an interface that allowed the data coder to watch the playback
of the session from the first-person perspective of a participant while at the same time
visualizing the session from the complementary perspective of a third person or seeing
another adjustable point of view that allowed the coder to understand the wider context.
        Having addressed the challenges related to coding the sessions, the next step in
the mixed method approach was to create a codebook. The new first-person playback
system allowed for the data coders to play back each session from the point of view
of each learner and code time intervals for events like object attention, attention to the
other participant, joint attention to an object, and attention to the recorded lecture. The
head VR developer, with the assistance of a researcher and an intern, coded segments
together to iteratively identify a set of codes that could be used to obtain good inter-rater
reliability. Finally, with an established codebook in hand, the researcher and intern coded
each session from the perspective of each individual participant with nested connections
to coded activities of other participants who were in the VR environment simultaneously.
        One of the primary emergent results from the codebook development was the
identification of aha! moments. These moments were defined by a participant verbalizing
a clear understanding or breakthrough as evidenced by an aha! exclamation or
statement of excitement around noticing or demonstrating something. Having the data
coded within the platform allowed for programmatic analysis of the data, including
seeking patterns of joint attention and exploration in connection with aha! moments. The
discovery of these aha! moments represented a critical step toward understanding that
the created solution had demonstrated a potential for addressing the stated challenge
of encouraging collaborative exploration of electrostatics principles.
44 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     other challenges that may need to be simultaneously addressed in order to produce
     a viable result for learners. For example, in the case of Electrostatic Playground,
     there was a broad challenge to make electrostatics concepts more accessible and
     a narrower challenge to make the data easier to label. Complex challenges call for
     engineering mindsets, systems thinking, and modular design. In the same way, the
     learning engineering process is both iterative and nested. (See Chapter 4, Learning
     Engineering is Engineering.)
           Regardless of the number of nested challenges or difficulty associated with
     addressing these, each part of the process continues to center and apply the learning
     sciences using human-centered engineering design methodologies and data-informed
     decision-making to support learners and their development. Ultimately, the learning
     engineering process allows the team to focus their attention on the challenge at hand,
     while the context reminds them of how this challenge can be situated within other
     work being done to support learners in the context that binds their work.



     Electrostatic Playground: Closing the Loop
     Two key actions became clear based on the results of the implementation and
     discussions among the learning engineering team. First, while the aha! results
     were promising, the overall small number of learners who engaged with the
     system in the first round dictated that another round of implementation should be
     carried out before conclusions related to e!ectiveness could be made. Second,
     while this initial data suggested strong connections between joint object attention
     and aha! moments, the learning engineering team, especially the subject-matter
     experts, noted a need for more purposeful data related to content learning gains of
     participants. This need would require additional instrumentation to collect pre-post
     assessments of electrostatics situated within the overall physics course structure.
     With these two outputs from the initial learning engineering process clarified,
     the next round of implementation was scheduled for the following term with the
     implementation of the VR system enacted as it was in the previous cycle to ensure
     comparability across the data.




     Endnote
     1 Kessler, Aaron, Melissa Boston, and Mary Kay Stein. “Exploring How Teachers Support Students’
       Mathematical Learning in Computer-Directed Learning Environments.” Information and Learning
       Sciences 121, no. 1/2 (2019): 52–78. https://doi.org/10.1108/ILS-07-2019-0075
• A process defines how work is done. Processes have inputs, process
  steps, and outputs.

• The learning engineering process can be generalized: it starts with
  understanding the challenge within a context, and then it includes cycles
  of creation, implementation, and investigation.

• The process is iterative and includes multiple passes.

• Challenges that need to be solved using the learning engineering process
  are often complex and require a multifaceted learning engineering team
  to address them.

• The learning engineering process starts by understanding the challenge
  in context, but after that, the next steps may vary. Di!erent teams will
  have di!erent journeys through it, depending on their challenge and its
  contextual factors. The challenge may call for creation of a new learning
  experience, adjustments to the implementation of an existing learning
  solution, or additional data analyses as part of the investigation phase.

• Learning engineering processes used by a large team may be di!erent
  from those used by a small one, and the processes for developing one
  kind of experience (for example, a training simulation) may be di!erent
  from those used for designing a di!erent activity (such as a secondary
  school curriculum).

• Learning engineering challenges, as well as the processes used to
  address them, often have sub-challenges or require sub-processes that
  need to be considered concurrently.

• Processing, analyzing, and interpreting the data from an implementation
  of a learning experience is necessary to inform the next iterative cycle of
  the learning engineering process.




                                      LEARNING ENGINEERING IS A PROCESS

                    KEY POINTS
CHAPTER 2


Learning Engineering
Applies the Learning
Sciences
by Jim Goodell, Janet Kolodner, and Aaron Kessler



Learning engineering is a process and practice that applies the
learning sciences using human-centered engineering design
methodologies and data-informed decision-making to support
learners and their development.



In 1928, Alexander Fleming discovered the miracle drug penicillin. That scientific
discovery had limited value to humanity until, more than a decade later, the
chemical engineers at Pfizer developed a process to make penicillin available to the
masses. The medical breakthrough took both scientific discovery and innovations in
engineering to produce the drug at scale.
       In 1967, the father of learning engineering Herb Simon wrote, “learning is a
complex psychological process, and it would be naïve to think that anyone can design
an effective learning environment and an effective program of learning experiences
for students without a mastery of what is known, scientifically and practically, about
that process.” 1
       While the twenty-first century has been called the “golden age for brain
research,” many learning science discoveries have yet to be applied at scale.
Formalizing the tools and practices of learning engineering as a profession might
create the opportunity for us to move from the “golden age for brain research” to the
“golden age for human learning.”
       This chapter examines some key concepts from the learning sciences. It includes
closely related concepts about learning and the human mind (a conceptual model


DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-6
This chapter has been made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license.
48 | Learning Engineering Toolkit


   (up)
                                            of how people think and learn) and concepts
                                            related to the brain (the physical and chemical
                                            aspects of the human nervous system that enable
                                            thought and learning). Some concepts apply to
                                            both the mind and the brain, even if just one of
                                            those words is used. Of course, this chapter only
                                            scratches the surface of what’s known about
                                            how people learn. It’s intended as a primer for
  (down)                                    those with backgrounds in other fields but who
                                EARTH
                                            are entering the world of learning engineering,
                                            perhaps as part of a multidisciplinary team. It
      FIGURE 2.1. A simple                  might also be a refresher for some with prior
      conception of up and down             knowledge of the learning sciences.


                                               !!"
      Let’s start with a fictitious story as we unpack how learning works. Mia is four years
      old, and her brother Kai is three. They’re naturally curious and always learning.
      They learn by observing the world around them. They learn through play. They
      learn from interactions with their parents and other adults. They’ve both learned
      some basic notions of quantity. Mia learned from her mom how to count ten blocks.
      Kai so far can count to three, and Mia is helping him as they play with blocks.
      They’re also exposed to educational media such as PBS Kids and recent iterations of
      the preschool classic Sesame Street.
             Mia and Kai have imperfect understandings of the world. They observed how
      gravity works by dropping food from their highchairs and then by falling down
                                         when trying to walk. They assume that the world is
                                         flat and that things and people can fall down. Their
                                         concept of gravity is something like the idea shown
                                         in Figure 2.1.
                                                Both have learned how to recognize a circle,
                                         and Mia understands that a circle is round. So, when
                                         someone tells Mia that the world is round, she fits


                                        FIGURE 2.2. “Round” earth conception
                         Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 49



this new information as best she can into what she already knows. Combining the
concepts of down and round might look like the idea in Figure 2.2.
       It’s actually quite complex to come to the understand that down depends on
where you are on earth, and cognitive scientists and educational psychologists have
done much research to learn how to help children who are having difficulty grasping
that idea.2 It won’t be until years later that Mia understands the concept of a spher-
ical earth or the force of gravity, even as imperfectly conceptualized in Figure 2.3.
       But it’s not only children who have to make sense of new ideas and concepts,
and it’s not only children who have difficulty grasping the complexities and nuances
of new concepts. Adults, as well, are continually adjusting our mental models (or
“schemas” or “internal models”) to refine our understandings of concepts and to ac-
commodate new discoveries. For example, learning engineering professionals need
to be life-long learners who make it their business to always be up to date on what’s
known about how people learn—continuously updating their understanding so that
they can design the most effective learning experiences and conditions.
       Indeed, gaining expertise is the process of constantly reworking one’s mental
models. The more varied experiences someone has had with some idea, the more
chance that person has had to add complexity and nuance to their mental
models. We recognize someone as an expert when they’ve
organized and filled their mental models so well that they
can figure things out faster than others and when they
can use their mental models to figure out things
others can’t. We’ll explore expertise in more
detail later in this chapter; for now, the important
thing to recognize is that becoming an expert
requires more than just memorizing more facts.
Experts think differently than novices because
they’ve developed better mental models. As
learners move from novice to expert, they
are continuously reconstructing their
understanding, reorganizing knowledge
into categories, and connecting new
ideas to previously learned concepts.
       Throughout this
chapter we’ll follow Mia
and Kai as they develop          FIGURE 2.3. Conception of
                                 gravity and a spherical earth
a deeper understanding
50 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     of the world in which they live by perfecting their mental models through formal
     and informal learning experiences.


                                            !""
                                     Novice learners, in any new domain, start with an in-
                                     complete and imperfect understanding. Learning and
                                     practice build new connections and replace others,
 EXP ERTS DON’T JUST                gradually improving their understanding and ways of
     KNOW MORE.                     organizing the concepts.
                                           As Mia enters elementary school, she has a
     THEY KNOW                      foundational understanding about how addition works
                                   based on her background knowledge about quantity
      DIFFERENTLY.
                                   derived from, for example, her time spent playing with
                                   blocks. She understands the concepts of more and less.
                                   Counting sets of blocks may have also helped her build
    an understanding of the concept of multiplication, and that puts her at an advantage
    over children who try to learn multiplication as simply a set of facts. Mia has a
    deeper understanding of the concept of multiplication, which builds a foundation
    for more advanced mathematics learning. In contrast, a child who only memorizes a
    script of multiplication tables probably won’t have the necessary conceptual under-
    standing needed to move on to more advanced topics.
           Despite Mia’s early experiences with basic arithmetic, her mental model is
    imperfect, and it’ll be challenged later in elementary school when learning new con-
    cepts such as negative numbers. For example, she understands that taking away two
    blocks from three blocks leaves one block.


                             –  = 
     But she’s confused by a subtraction problem that would result in a negative number:


                             –  = ?
           She thinks, you can’t take away three—because there’s only two! Negative
     numbers don’t make sense when your mental model is based entirely on counting
     blocks. Mia will experience cognitive dissonance when a new concept contradicts
                         Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 51



her existing understanding of the world. “Cognitive dissonance refers to a situation
involving conflicting attitudes, beliefs, or behaviors. This produces a feeling of men-
tal discomfort leading to an alteration in one of the attitudes, beliefs, or behaviors to
reduce the discomfort and restore balance.” 3
        Mia’s fourth- or fifth-grade teacher will need to help her transform and refine
her existing concept of quantity into a more sophisticated form that includes neg-
ative numbers. Cognitive scientists would say this is refining an imperfect mental
model of how the universe works so that it’s more accurate and consistent with new
experiences.4 As this description implies, the idea of mental models recognizes
that people construct small-scale internal models of the world and of their places
in it.5 Old ideas can combine with new ones to improve upon a naïve or imperfect
understanding or ability.6 No one can know all things, so we do our best to create
those internal representations and then fill in the gaps to make sense of what we
already know or eventually learn. Children learning the concept of negative values
must, in a sense, build in their mind an improved internal model so they can better
understand how quantity works in the real world. As they adjust their mental models,
new connections are formed in the structures of the brain. In the case of learning to
add and subtract, the new mental model must eventually work for both positive and
negative quantities.
        How can we help learners develop better mental models? One way is by
helping them recognize a connection to something else they’ve already learned or
experienced. For instance, Mia had a mental model of fractional quantities from
when she baked snickerdoodle cookies with her grandma and measured a half cup
of flour. That experience helped her when it was time to learn fractions. Before
learning about negative numbers Mia had played “store” and acted out not allowing
her brother Kai to buy a plastic food item because he didn’t have enough money. She
told him he needed to “go to work” and earn two more dollars, and then he would
have enough. She understood that money is used to buy things and that a person
can only buy something if they have enough money. She modeled in play with her
brother what she had observed from the adults in her life, who had to go to work to
earn more money.
        If the teacher picks up on this tangible example rooted in Mia’s prior conception
of the world, then it’s a short way from there to making the connection to negative
numbers (as useful for expressing how much more of something, like money, that
someone needs). Another student in her class may also have played store but in a
less sophisticated way that didn’t get into figuring out the difference between how
much more someone needs to buy something. For that student, the prior knowledge
52 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




     FIGURE 2.4. The child exposed to a number line is given a new mental
     model allowing negative numbers and fractional quantities to make
     sense alongside prior knowledge of whole number quantities


     gained from play may not be a sufficient anchor for the new concept. As we’ll explore
     later in this chapter, developmental factors also affect this. A learner may not be
     developmentally ready to grasp a new concept.
            Teachers may also help Mia and her classmates expand their mental models by
     using a number line as shown in Figure 2.4 (above). First the positive side of a num-
     ber line is used to help children understand whole numbers and fractional quantities.
     Later the negative side is used to introduce the concept of negative numbers. The
     number line introduces fractional quantities and then negative numbers in a way that
     makes sense alongside well-established concepts of positive whole number quanti-
     ties from playing with and counting blocks. With the number line model, addition
     and subtraction of positive integers still works, but children can begin to grasp more
     advanced concepts like negative numbers and fractions.


                                            !#"
     Cognitive science defines categories of learning processes. Each can lead to different
     kinds of knowledge changes and, ultimately, to robust learning outcomes. Cognitive
     learning categories include: 7
           • Understanding and sense making
           • Induction and refinement
           • Memory and fluency building
            Across all of the categories, an important component for learning is
     constructive feedback. Feedback gives learners information about the quality of
     their ideas and performance that they can use to make adjustments, and effective
                         Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 53



feedback is specific, understandable, timely, non-threatening, and actionable.
       In the 1940s, Dutch chess master and psychologist Adriaan de Groot want-
ed to find out why world-class chess masters outperformed their challengers. He
showed world-class masters and less experienced—but still extremely good—play-
ers examples of chess games and asked them to think aloud as they chose the moves
they would make. “DeGroot’s hypothesis was that the chess masters would be more
likely than the non-masters to (a) think through all the possibilities before making a
move and (b) think through all the possible countermoves of the opponent for every
move considered.” 8 He was wrong.
       His research found that the world-class experts were able to recognize pat-
terns of information that the extremely good players couldn’t see. More recent re-
search has discovered that information is organized differently in an expert’s brain
and chunked together in ways that allow them to solve problems. “DeGroot con-
cluded that the knowledge acquired over tens of thousands of hours of chess playing
enabled chess masters to out-play their opponents. Specifically, masters were more
likely to recognize meaningful chess configurations and realize the strategic impli-
cations of these situations; this recognition allowed them to consider sets of possible
moves that were superior to others.”
       In his best-selling book Outliers: The Story of Success, Malcolm Gladwell
popularized the idea that those who are the best in the world—at everything from
music to computer programming—have probably spent ten-thousand hours practic-
ing and developing their abilities.9 He makes a case that the 1960s rock band, The
Beatles, had ten-thousand hours of deliberate practice before becoming worldwide
superstars. There’s nothing scientific about the number “ten thousand,” but there is
science behind the idea that to become highly skilled in any profession requires de-
liberate practice with feedback. Of course, there are those who have practiced music,
a sport, or chess for more than ten-thousand hours and haven’t become superstar mu-
sicians, Olympic athletes, or world champion chess players. Some of the differences
may be influenced by innate abilities or disabilities relevant to the given domain. For
example, it’s harder for someone under six feet tall to become an NBA basketball
player when competing against others over seven feet tall. (Although players like
Isaiah Thomas, at five feet and nine inches, show that sometimes shorter people can
train their body and mind to become among the best in the world!)
       Very often it’s not inherited ability or disability that keeps the novice musi-
cian, basketball player, or mathematician from becoming an expert. Moving toward
expertise can be held back by a lack of foundational knowledge, lack of interest,
faulty mindsets about what’s possible, lack of a sufficient level of focus or intensity
54 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     of deliberate practice, or lack of the right formative feedback.
            A person must learn the basics before attempting to learn the advanced con-
     cepts in most knowledge domains, and they also must develop connections with:
           1. the contexts and practices in the world in which
              the knowledge is intended to apply,
           2. core concepts that serve to organize and
              make sense of the knowledge, and
           3. the representations and ways of communicating
              used by experts in the domain.10
            Early introduction of these connections can build bridges to higher levels of
     learning and ultimately to transfer of learning. Transfer is one of the characteristics
     of expertise; it’s the ability to extend knowledge, reapplying it to new contexts or
     new kinds of problems. Transfer involves a variety of steps, including recognizing
     the potential fit, figuring out the correspondences, making the mapping, and adapting
     the old into the new. This is easier or harder depending on reflection done in earlier
     situations, the specifics of existing mental models, and the connections among those
     mental models.


                                             !$"
     Fredrick Reif was a physics teacher at the University of California who shifted his
     interest from research in physics to research on thinking and learning in complex
     domains. He joined Carnegie Mellon University in 1969. His 2008 book, Applying
     Cognitive Science to Education, was dedicated to the memory of his friend and
     colleague, the father of learning engineering, Herb Simon. In the book, Reif advo-
     cated for “a truly scientific approach to education” that strives to better understand
     “the underlying human thought processes and knowledge required for good perfor-
     mance” in particular domains. “Such an approach would then deliberately exploit an
     understanding of these underlying mechanisms to help students learn.”
           Technological advances in the way we study and explore the brain have dis-
     covered that “the brain is a dynamic organ, shaped to a great extent by experience—
     by what a living being does and has done.” 11
           We now know that neural pathways in the brain are continuously being
     formed based on life experiences. Learning organizes and reorganizes your brain,
     changing its physical structure. This and other breakthrough findings direct us to
                          Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 55



think differently about teaching and learning, about the structures and culture of
current systems, and about the practices and processes of education and training.


How Your Brain is Wired
The “wiring” of your brain is shaped by experiences that determine both the behav-
ior of individual brain cells (neurons) and the network of connections among them.
Figure 2.5 shows the structure of a neuron.12
       You can think of a neuron as the basic wiring of the brain, with inputs con-
trolling outputs. Like how an electrical circuit for a light may have a switch (input)
that controls whether the light is on or off, each neuron may have inputs in the form
of chemical stimuli from the nervous system that result in output conditions. If you
turn on a light switch (the input) something happens at the output, the light bulb
illuminates as shown in Figure 2.6.
       A slightly more complex circuit has two double-pole switches controlling one
light, like when there’s one light switch at the top of a set of stairs and one at the bot-
tom. If the light is off, switching the position of either of the switches will turn it on.
       An electrical circuit with multiple switches is a helpful mental model for
beginning to understand the underlying principles of the neuroscience of learning.
Each neuron is wired to react to a combination of inputs. A certain set of inputs,
in the form of chemical or electrical messages, will trigger the neuron to “turn on”
outputs. Through experiences and effort, learners’ brains change. Learning builds
new connections and changes how individual neurons respond to stimuli. This
“rewiring” improves the memory recall and capability of the brain.



                      Dendrite
                                                                    Axon Terminal
                                                Node of
                                                Ranvier
 INPUT                                                                      OUTPUT
 ACTIONS                            Cell body                               ACTIONS
 via dendrite field                                                         via axon terminal



                                     Axon                       Schwann cell
                                              Myelin sheath
              Nucleus

FIGURE 2.5. Function of a neuron
56 | Learning Engineering Toolkit


            INPUT ACTION




           CLOSED SWITCH



                                                                 LIGHT BULB
                                                                  (OUTPUT)



     FIGURE 2.6. A simple single switch circuit: Closing the switch turns on the light




              3 WAY                                               3 WAY
              SWITCH                                             SWITCH




     FIGURE 2.7. Three-way switch: Changing the position of either changes the light’s state
                          Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 57



      You don’t need to be a neuroscientist to do learning engineering, but it’s
essential to have some basic notions about how people learn. For example, with the
knowledge that learning experiences make structural changes to the brain, learning
engineering teams can approach their problem solving unconstrained by old notions
that human brains are fixed in structure and capacity. As Channa Cook-Harvey,
senior researcher at the Learning Policy Institute, explains:

      The brain and the development of intelligences and capacities are plastic
      and malleable. The brain develops over the entire lifespan as a function
      of experiences that activate neural pathways which permit new kinds
      of thinking and performance. The kinds of experience matter greatly.
      Relationships also matter greatly for learning.13

      There is no learning from scratch. Learning is an active process in which a
learner constructs meaning by mapping new information onto prior knowledge. As
we experience life, our minds try to fit new information into what we already know
about the world. Learning works best when we have the background knowledge that
helps us make sense of the new information. Learning doesn’t work well if the pre-
requisite knowledge on which to anchor the new knowledge is missing.


FIXED BRAIN NOTION                          PLASTIC BRAIN NOTION
                                            A person can learn (almost) anything with
Some people are intelligent, some are not
                                            the right conditions, experiences, and will
                                            Adaptive learning experiences
Fixed curriculum (variable outcomes)
                                            (fixed objectives)
Fixed pace (some will get it                Get prerequisite “structure” in
others never will anyway)                   place before moving on
Instructor led                              Student centered
                                            Considers all approaches, conditions
Uses primarily established
                                            and experiences that might lead to
pedagogy and andragogy
                                            the desired learning objectives

FIGURE 2.8. Comparison of fixed brain vs. plastic brain notions


      We used the example of a light switch to introduce the concept of how a neuron
works because we assumed some readers wouldn’t have prior knowledge of neurons
or brain chemistry but that all readers would have experience with light switches.
(Ideally, we would have assessed your prior knowledge, left out concepts that you
58 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     didn’t need to learn, and left in just enough for you to anchor new knowledge to
     existing knowledge. But the book format is limiting. It doesn’t adapt and personalize
     the learning experience to optimize your learning outcomes.)
            The wiring of a light switch is only an imperfect model of how a neuron works.
     A neuroscientist reading this might object to the analogy and point out the ways in
     which such a simple and concrete model is wrong. Similarly, a cognitive scientist
     may feel that the cognitive science concepts presented later in this chapter are over-
     simplified. Novice learners, in any new domain, start with incomplete and imperfect
     understanding.



                                             !%"
     In our fictitious story about Mia and Kai we examined an example of how shallow
     conceptual understanding of quantity, from counting blocks and playing store, can
     be enriched by helping learners expand and refine their mental models. We’ve looked
     at a shallow conceptual model for how the brain works, building new connections
     based on existing structures. This notion of “building on what exists” is foundational,
     and it’s a concept shared by neuroscience and cognitive science.
            In the early twentieth century, Soviet psychologist Lev Vygotsky theorized
     that people learn best within the zone of proximal development—that sweet spot
     just beyond what a person can do on their own but not beyond what they can do with
     help.14 That is, learning tends to work best when learners are challenged beyond their
     current levels of development by just the right amount. As a person learns, the zone
     moves, and they can engage in more advanced learning.
            In other words, productive learning requires that learning activities are



                                                         ZONE OF L
                                                          PROXIMA
                                                         DEVELOPMENT
                                THINGS THE
THINGS THE LEARNER             LEARNER CAN              THINGS THE LEARNER
  CAN ALREADY DO               DO WITH A BIT         CAN’T DO (EVEN WITH HELP)
                                 OF HELP

   FIGURE 2.9. Zone of
   proximal development
                           Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 59



continually at the proper level of difficulty. Tasks that are too difficult are frustrating
and impossible to connect with prior knowledge, and tasks that are too easy have no
challenge in them and often result in boredom. In between these two extremes lies
what cognitive scientists call “desirable difficulty.”
       When activities remain at the desirable level, learners have the opportunity
to experience flow. Psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi called flow an optimal
condition that “can result in deep learning and high levels of personal and work
satisfaction.” 15 Said another way, the right level of challenge keeps learners engaged
and focused.
       One way to help learners find the right level of desirable difficulty is to provide
the proper scaffolding. Scaffolding creates support while recognizing a learner’s
roles in their own learning process.* Scaffolding provides the structure they need
to successfully engage in, and learn from, more complex tasks than they could
otherwise handle. Scaffolding includes hints, prompts, conceptual frameworks (like
advance organizers), process support, focus support, and strategic guidance. The
goal is to provide just enough support to make tasks achievable without losing useful
complexity or context.
       Most adults are already familiar with scaffolding. Parents often scaffold learn-
ing for their infants in ways similar to those used by effective educators.16 For exam-
ple, they may:
      •   arrange the environment to promote learning,
      •   give cues to guide understanding about how to behave in new situations,
      •   use labels to classify objects and events,
      •   frame or model language and behavior,
      •   help the child connect a new situation to a more familiar one,
      •   interest the child in the task,
      •   reduce the number of steps required to solve a problem,
      •   maintain pursuit of a goal by directing activity and motivational feedback,
      •   control frustration and risk, or
      •   demonstrate an idealized version of the act to be performed.
      The list above gives examples of supporting knowledge and skill as well as
frustration and motivation. Some scaffolding focuses on cognition, such as making


* A popular misconception is that the function of education is to pour information into the
  learner’s mind. The truth is that learning takes focused effort on the part of the learner.
  Learning doesn’t happen without some level of effort or attention.
60 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     a task easier for a learner. Other scaffolding can focus on, for example, drawing a
     learner into a task, sequencing steps for desirable challenge, or creating structure to
     help a learner reach their objectives.
            Not only must a learner be an active participant for effective learning, what a
     learner thinks about themselves—and about learning—makes a difference. Helping
     learners understand that many aspects of successful learning, such as strategy and
     effort, are under their own control fosters a sense of self-efficacy. And a related con-
     cept for learning engineering is learner agency, the “methodological development
     of both the capacity and the freedom of learners to exercise choice regarding what is
     to be learned and to co-create how that learning is to take place.”17 Learner agency
     assumes that learners have some role in:
           • Setting goals
           • Initiating action toward those goals
           • Reflecting on and regulate progress toward those goals
            Like many aspects of learning engineering, there are trade-offs in balancing
     the benefits of learner agency with the agency of education and training providers.
     Later in the chapter we will explore the importance of cultural contexts for learning,
     including the role of a safe environment and nurturing relationships. When learners
     feel safe, they’re more likely to see failure as an opportunity to find out what they
     still need to learn and adjust learning strategies; that is, learners are more likely to
     persevere.


                                             !&"
     Let’s fast-forward in the lives of our fictional learners Mia and Kai. Mia is entering
     middle school, and Kai is in elementary school. Mia is an ‘A’ student and an avid
     reader. She loves reading mysteries, and her favorite subject is mathematics.
            Kai has had some difficulty in the early grades. The policy and culture of
     the school tends to support a teach-to-the-middle approach; it doesn’t optimize
     the learning experiences based on the learner variability, and Kai isn’t an average
     student. His abilities and disabilities don’t fit the teach-to-the-middle approach. He
     takes longer to do writing assignments and is a slow reader. He developed faster
     than his peers in other areas such as executive function, deeper understanding of
     mathematics concepts, and critical thinking, but the grading system didn’t reflect
     those abilities. Executive function is the group of complex mental processes and
     cognitive abilities needed for goal-directed behavior.18
                         Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 61



       For Kai, it was frustrating every time the teacher said, “time’s up; turn in your
assignment,” when he was half finished, but he struggled through it for several years,
doing just well enough to get average grades.
       By fifth grade, he was at risk of needing to repeat the year. He was struggling
with reading, writing, and memorizing math facts. Until then, he was able to fumble
along, eking out passing grades in the mold of group instruction. However, one in-
cident in fifth grade brought the disconnection between the instructional model and
Kai’s learner differences to a head. The teacher wrote on the board several columns
of facts for the class to transcribe and then, presuming the class was done with the
first column, erased it to write more facts. Kai wasn’t finished with the first column.
The teacher noticed this time that Kai was frustrated and struggling—not lazy.
       Kai was diagnosed with a learning disability and given some extra help with
reading. Still, most of the time he was stuck in the fixed-pace and non-differentiated
group instructional model.
       One bright spot in this part of Kai’s life was playing chess. It was something
he could feel good about. His uncle taught him the basics of the game, and he was
able to beat his sister Mia most of the time, even though she was a year older and
“smarter” (meaning she did much better in school). For Kai, chess was challenging
but not frustrating.


                                        !'"
Learning is dependent on cognitive capacities such as attention, executive function,
working memory, and processing skills. Cognitive science research on grandmaster
chess players and other experts helps us understand how the expert brain can do
things faster and easier than novices. It also helps us understand how novices can
become experts. The difference between a novice and an expert brain has a lot to do
with how each uses two kinds of memory:

      • Short-term, working memory is slower, error prone, more deliberate,
        has limited retention, requires greater mental effort, and is the place
        where new learning starts.
      • Long-term memory has long retention, is efficient, operates
        automatically (without effort), and when trained error-free; it’s what
        experts use to do complex tasks effortlessly.

     Both kinds of memory are used to make sense of new information. Experts,
however, have been able to rewire their brains over time so that long-term memory
62 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     can make sense of, and act on, even very complex information without consciously
     thinking about it.
            Renowned psychologist Daniel Kahneman in Thinking, Fast and Slow de-
     scribes two systems that drive the way we think. System 1 that uses long-term mem-
     ory is fast, intuitive, and emotional. System 2 is slower, more deliberate, more logi-
     cal, lazier, and easily distracted.19


  SENSORY               WORKING MEMORY                      LONG-TERM MEMORY
  MEMORY                (SYSTEM 2)                          (SYSTEM 1)
                        • Short retention                   • Long retention
                        • Verbal, conscious                 • Nonverbal, not conscious
                        • About 5 things at once            • Highly parallel
  Combining senses,     • Slow                              • Fast
  e.g., audio and       • Error prone                       • Error-free recall (with training)
  visual, aids memory   • Highly flexible                   • Rigid (decisions must “fit”)
                        • Can generate new insights         • Biased (doesn’t challenge
                        • More discriminating                 what seems to “fit”)

 FIGURE 2.10. General comparison of memory types


            Figure 2.10 illustrates the relationship among working memory, long-term
     memory, and sensory memory. Sensory memory is very short-term retention of im-
     pressions of sensory information such as seeing an image or hearing a sound. That
     sensory information may be passed easily to working memory (conscious memory)
     if used for immediate processing. With effort (practice, study) a learner may move
     information from working memory to long-term memory. This multi-store or modal
     model of memory was first proposed by Atkinson and Shiffrin in 1968.20
            A novice chess player uses System 2 and working memory to try to think
     about the consequences of each move, two or three moves out. This is hard work.
     It creates what cognitive scientists call cognitive load. On the other hand, using
     System 1, an expert chess player can recognize patterns automatically and with far
     less cognitive load. This pattern recognition gives the expert a kind of intuition to
     sense the level of risk and opportunity of a given move.
            Working memory—where new learning starts—has limited capacity and re-
     quires greater mental effort. Cognitive load is the effort used in working memory.
     In some cases, a heavy cognitive load can impede learning. Cognitive load theory
     suggests that learning experiences should be designed so that they don’t overload
     working memory.
                         Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 63



       Another kind of cognitive load has to do with the number of sensory inputs a
person has to process at a single moment. It’s more difficult to think and learn in a
chaotic and distracting environment or when too much information is presented for
processing at once. A novice chess player sees the position and rank of up to thirty-
two pieces on the sixty-four squares of the board as separate inputs. The expert has
learned to see patterns that chunk information to be processed as fewer sensory
inputs.
       Building expertise takes deliberate practice with feedback. Newly learned
skills or knowledge are generally forgotten over time if not reinforced with practice
and applied. Even if the goal were only to pass a test, cognitive science has found that
short practices spaced out over time are better for learning than cramming. Spaced
learning or the spacing effect and related findings about the lag time in between
practice sessions (lag effect) helps inform mathematical models for optimizing the
amount and frequency of practice a learner needs to gain and retain knowledge.

      The spacing effect is the observation that people tend to remember
      things more effectively if they use spaced repetition practice (short study
      periods spread out over time) as opposed to massed practice (for exam-
      ple, cramming). The phenomenon was first documented by Ebbinghaus
      (1885), using himself as a subject in several experiments to memorize
      verbal utterances. In one study, after a day of cramming, he could accu-
      rately recite twelve-syllable sequences (of gibberish, apparently). How-
      ever, he could achieve comparable results with half as many practices
      spread out over three days.

      The lag effect 21 is the related observation that people learn even better
      if the spacing between practices gradually increases. For example, a
      learning schedule might begin with review sessions a few seconds apart,
      then minutes, then hours, days, months, and so on, with each successive
      review stretching out over a longer and longer time interval.22

      Different kinds of learning, such as learning a word in a new language versus
learning how to solve a kind of mathematical problem, may have different optimum
practice schedules. The best time to practice is when you’re on the verge of forgetting,
but that time may be different for every new word you’re trying to learn or every step
in a procedural process. A learner can’t possibly keep track of when they’re on the
verge of forgetting every possible thing they want to retain, so learning engineers
develop solutions that use formative assessments to help keep track and schedule
64 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     practice for them.
            Building expertise is about making new mental models, and spaced learning
     is about making what you know more accessible; retrieval practice combines the
     two. After many hours of practice, the expert brain is conditionalized to recognize
     and respond23 effortlessly.24 The expert mind also has developed more sophisticated
     mental models for addressing novel problems. The chess master recognizes a pattern
     and knows what to do based on the patterns wired into long-term memory. This
     quick retrieval of relevant information from long-term memory is effortless, not
     necessarily faster; experts might take longer to answer a question because they want
     to fully understand a problem. The same kind of process applies to learning to read,
     learning to code, or becoming a star athlete.

           Learning high-level chess can be compared to learning to read. A first
           grader works hard at recognizing individual letters and assembling
           them into syllables and words, but a good adult reader perceives entire
           clauses. An expert reader has also acquired the ability to assemble
           familiar elements in a new pattern and can quickly “recognize” and
           correctly pronounce a word that she has never seen before. In chess,
           recurrent patterns of interacting pieces play the role of letters, and a
           chess position is a long word or sentence.25

           At the most basic level, learning engineering is about facilitating this overall
     learning process—helping a learner move from novice to a greater level of expertise
     for any given skill, knowledge, or ability.


                                            !("
     Carnegie Mellon University professor Ken Koedinger is an inventor of intelligent
     tutoring software for mathematics, founder of the Pittsburgh Science of Learning
     Center known as LearnLab, and co-founder of Carnegie Learning, Inc.26 His work
     builds from John Anderson’s ACT-R theory of cognition (adaptive control of thought–
     rational), a theory for simulating and understanding human cognition. Anderson’s
     theory, in turn, builds from the work of Allen Newell and Herbert Simon, who
     received the Association for Computing Machinery’s A. M. Turing Award in 1975
     for contributions to artificial intelligence and the psychology of human cognition.
           Influenced by generations of thought leaders at the roots of learning engineer-
     ing, Ken developed the Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 27
     with Albert Corbett and Charles Perfetti. It helps people apply cognitive science
                         Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 65



research to practice. (See Figure 2.11.)
      A learning sciences framework like KLI organizes discrete facts from the
learning sciences into a model that can be practically applied in the design of learning
experiences and solutions. It recognizes that we can’t know exactly what thought
process is going on inside a learner’s head. However, we can build an approximate
model of what a person knows and how they think by measuring how they respond
to specific prompts. The more precisely we can define what a learner knows, the
better we can measure their strengths, weaknesses, specific knowledge, and skill
gaps. With that and other data, we can infer what conditions and experiences might
help that learner fill those gaps.
      One of the authors interviewed Ken in his office at the Human Computer
Interaction Institute in Newell-Simon Hall on the Carnegie Mellon University
campus. (The building was named after Herb Simon and his colleague Allen Newell,
both pioneers in artificial intelligence and the psychology of human cognition.)
      “From my experience,” Ken said, “you can’t just take the science and apply
it. There are a lot of decisions I’m making for which science provides me little to




FIGURE 2.11. The KLI Framework defines observable instructional
and assessment events, and unobservable learning events. Knowledge
components are the competencies that cause learner performances,
which can be observed/measured with assessment events.
66 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     no guidance. So that led me to believe, well, maybe I can do some of my own little
     studies on these and then other times we’ll just guess. And then, when we had the
     opportunity to test whether those guesses worked, maybe 50 percent of the time—
     maybe—they did.”
           The KLI Framework defines observable instructional and assessment events
     as well as unobservable learning events. Performances observed and measured with
     assessment events tell us something about a person’s learning.
           Instructional events are changes in the learning environment or learner ex-
     periences intended to cause learning events. Sometimes an assessment event is an
     instructional event, such as with formative assessments where the learning measures
     are instrumented into the learning experience, for example, tracking what a learner
     does during an online simulation or instrumented classroom activity. Other times,
     an assessment event is just an assessment.

           KLI identifies three broad classes of learning events:
           1. memory and fluency processes,
           2. induction and refinement processes, and
           3. understanding and sense-making processes.

           Different learning events call for different kinds of learning experiences.
     Learning experiences can include externally directed formal instructional and as-
     sessment events or learner-directed informal events. Mia and Kai playing store was
     an observable informal learning experience that led to an unobservable learning
     event (Mia gaining conceptual understanding of negative numbers).
           If the goal is to help learners rewire their brains to know, think, and perform
     closer to the way that an expert thinks and performs, then a learning engineering
     challenge is to understand what’s going on inside expert brains when they demonstrate
     a complex skill or ability. What facts do they use? What mental strategies do they
     employ? What does mastery look like? It turns out this is a big challenge because
     experts often can’t tell you why they know something or how they get something
     done. Experts conditionalize their mental processing to be automatic. Expertise is
     often wired so deeply into long-term memory (the System 1 brain) that to the expert
     it may seem like intuition. They just know the answer!
           Another problem is that experts tend to forget how their brains worked
     as novices. Ken Koedinger and his learning scientist colleagues call this the
     expert blind spot in which “advanced content knowledge without well-developed
     knowledge of the learning and teaching of novices can lead to expert-based views
     of curricula that are at odds with the learning process.” Their research showed that
                         Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 67



“people with greater expertise tend to make assumptions about what novices know
that turn out to be in conflict with students’ actual performance and developmental
propensities.” 28
       The learning sciences community that discovered challenges such as the ex-
pert blind spot also developed processes for unpacking expertise and understanding
what competencies learners must develop on the path toward it. Here, a competency
defines any skill, knowledge, ability, attitude, habit of practice, or disposition that a
person can possess. Broadly defined, it’s any learning outcome.
       Learning engineering can take advantage of methodologies developed by
learning scientists to unpack competency definitions to an atomic level. This allows
us to develop finely grained assessment items and learning supports based on the
set of competencies that make up complex tasks. This level of specificity makes
it possible to use observable instructional and assessment events to infer learning
events (unobservable changes in a learner’s brain that impact performance).
       In KLI, an atomic competency definition is called a knowledge component.
Competency definitions can be defined at a higher level of granularity for assessing
complex tasks that involve coordination or synthesis of many knowledge components.
However, best practices for formative assessment call for unpacking that competency
definition into its parts and designing assessment items or performance tasks with
scaffolding, such as hints, that also measure those more granular components. If a
learner doesn’t succeed with a complex learning task, the more granular items can
be used to discover the root cause of the failure, for example, which knowledge
components need further development and support.
       Competency definitions used for purposes such as job descriptions or academic
standards are necessarily defined broadly and leave room for interpretation. For
example, an academic standard for mathematics specifies that a student should be
able to “solve word problems involving addition and subtraction of fractions referring
to the same whole, including cases of unlike denominators.” A job description may
include the requirement that the candidate has “knowledge of arithmetic, algebra,
geometry, calculus, statistics, and their applications.” 29
       Learning engineering calls for competency definitions with data-justified
specificity, meaning we want to be able to prove that the competency is at the atomic
level with data. A common mistake is to assume a competency definition addresses
a single measurable skill when it represents two or more skills that need to be further
unpacked to be reliably taught or assessed.
       To get to well-defined competency definitions with data-justified specificity
we can employ two sets of approaches:
68 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



           1. The first approach is a systematic process to understand the cognitive
              elements of a more broadly defined competency. One such methodology
              is called cognitive task analysis.
           2. The second tool is a data analytics methodology using student learning
              data to either validate or discover the human errors inevitably in the
              initial version of a set of competency definitions.

           Learning engineers assume that the first draft of a set of competency definitions
     won’t be perfect. Data expose those imperfections and allow us to iteratively fix
     competency assumptions as well as fix any learning activities and assessment items
     that were designed to teach or assess based on those flawed competency definitions.
     A story in Chapter 6 covers learning curve analysis, one data analytics method
     used to check assumptions about data-justified specificity.


                                             !)"
     Our fictitious characters Mia and Kai are now in college. Mia is studying cyber-
     security, a good fit for her, inspired by her love for mystery novels and proficiency
     in mathematics.
           Kai realized sometime along the way that he didn’t fit the mold of school but he
     could learn to be successful academically. Sometimes that involved figuring out for
     himself a mental workaround, such as on-the-fly calculating a math fact that he hadn’t
     memorized or visualizing a problem in a different way for deeper understanding
     rather than just using the rote method presented by a teacher or textbook. Although
     he struggled with reading as a child, his reading fluency grew with practice, and
     motivated by natural curiosity, he grew to love reading. He learned to love history,
     especially figuring out what circumstances affect other circumstances. He reads
     history well, now, because he has enough understanding of factors that might affect
     other factors to draw inferences as he reads. He had to spend a lot of time working
     on developing that competency.
           By developing his metacognitive strategies—that is, actively reflecting on
     and adapting his own mental processes—Kai was able to overcome what was di-
     agnosed as a learning disability when he was younger. In fact, he’s found that his
     learning differences and metacognitive strategies often put him at an advantage over
     his peers. He excels in some areas, such as chess and other strategy games.
           While Kai had to overcome some differences that didn’t fit the mold of school,
     some apparent learning struggles that children have early on when compared to
                         Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 69



peers may be due to normal development. Children progress developmentally at
different paces. If you plan to develop learning solutions for specific age groups,
it’s helpful to understand something about how the brain develops and functions at
different stages of life, from birth through late adulthood. Figure 2.12 shows stages
of brain development over the course of human life.
       We previously discussed how the brain is wired and how learning, in a sense,
rewires your brain. Neuroplasticity, also known as brain plasticity or neural plasticity,
is the ability of the brain to change throughout an individual’s life.30 At the single
cell level, synaptic plasticity 31 refers to changes in the connections between neurons,
whereas non-synaptic plasticity 32 refers to changes in their intrinsic excitability,
for example, how responsive they are to the chemical signals they receive.33 The
structure of the brain can change throughout life but may be more “plastic” during
developmental periods from prenatal to early 20s. For more detailed explanations of
what researchers have discovered about changes that occur with age and learning
across the life span, see How People Learn II. 34


                                        !!*"
As an adult, Mia is a cybersecurity expert for the Institute for Defense Analyses,
an American nonprofit corporation that helps the US government address national
security issues. Part of her success is that in addition to being a subject-matter
expert, she’s an expert life-long learner. Like many professions in the twenty-first
century, Mia’s job requirements for what she has to know and be able to do change
continually.
       Learning works best when the learner has “learned how to learn” and takes
an active role in the learning process. Learning how to learn includes developing
knowledge about learning strategies and practicing skills that apply those strategies.
It also involves developing productive mindsets (what the learner thinks about
learning) and dispositions, including habits of practice. People can learn to become
expert learners. As an adult, Kai is an expert learner and historian working as a
strategy analyst for governments and corporations.
       Learning to learn often involves so-called noncognitive factors. A report by
the University of Chicago Consortium on Chicago School Research identified five
noncognitive factors: 35
70 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




  The PRENATAL       The brain           Explosive growth    Growth and          The ADULT           LATE
  brain develops     increases           continues           pruning             BRAIN continue      ADULTHOOD
  new neurons,       fourfold during     AGE SIX TO          continues from      to add and          is associated
  synapses, and      PRESCHOOL           ADOLESCENCE         ADOLESCENCE         maintain            with declines in
  myelinated         YEARS and           o!set by            TO EARLY            synapses and        memory, speed
  axons at an        by age six is       synaptic            ADULTHOOD.          generate myelin     of cognitive
  astounding rate.   about 90% of        pruning. The        The brain           in response to      processing and
  At birth it has    adult brain         structure of the    reaches a size of   new learning.       ability to learn
  more structural    volume. Synaptic    brain is shaped     about 86 billion    As the adult        new information.
  elements than      connections         by experiences.     neurons and         learner acquires    However, it is
  it needs.          (gray matter)                           84 billion non-     new knowledge,      associated with
                     and myelination                         neuron cells.       regions of the      increased skill
                     of nerve fibers                                             cortex develop      in solving social
                     (white matter)                                              specialization of   dilemmas.
                     dramatically                                                function known
                     increase. Growth                                            as experience-
                     and synaptic                                                dependent
                     pruning are                                                 learning.
                     shaped by
                     experiences.
  Synaptic Pruning (birth to mid-to-late twenties)—use it or lose                E!ects of aging on the brain:
  it! During this period the brain lets some synapse connections die             The outer layer of the brain
  o! while adding and strengthening others. Synapses continually                 (cortex) starts to thin after age
  used are retained, those that are not used are eliminated. Both axon           forty. It is not clear if this means
  (transmitter) and dendrite (receiver) completely decay and die o!.             a decrease in brain tissue or is
  This sculpting of the brain improves the networking capacity of the            the result of some other factor
  brain and is associated with a heightened ability to learn. Some of the        such as lower hydration. It does,
  most significant “brain remodeling” happens during adolescence from            however, seem to correspond to
  pruning and the laying down of myelin sheaths that make the transfer           the start of cognitive decline often
  of information about 3,000 times faster for those connections. Through         observed in older adults. Older
  practice the learner’s brain lays down myelin to enable a skill.               adults are more likely to remember
                                                                                 the important implications of an
                                                                                 event while younger learners will
                                                                                 likely remember more details about
                                                                                 the event. Conditions such as life
                                                                                 satisfaction and having strong social
                                                                                 networks can reduce the speed
                                                                                 of age-related cognitive decline.


 FIGURE 2.12. Life-long brain development
 CC-BY Jim Goodell
 Sources: (a) Siegel, D. J. “Dr. Dan Siegel - BRAINSTORM: Brain Remodeling, Pruning and Myelin.”
 November 8, 2013. Video, https://youtu.be/s_MJg5zofOo. (b) Siegel, D. J.” Pruning, Myelination, and the
 Remodeling Adolescent Brain.” Psychology Today, February 4, 2014. (c) How People Learn II. (ibid.) (d)
 O’Rourke, M., Gasperini, R., & Young, K. M. (2014). Adult Myelination: Wrapping up Neuronal Plasticity.
 Neural Regeneration Research, 9(13), 1261–1264. https://doi.org/10.4103/1673-5374.137571.
                         Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 71



      1. Academic Behaviors
         Going to class, doing homework, organizing, participating, studying
      2. Academic Perseverance
         Grit, tenacity, delayed gratification, self-discipline, self-control
      3. Academic Mindsets
         I belong in this academic community. My ability and competence grow
         with my effort. I can succeed at this. This work has value for me.
      4. Learning Strategies
         Study skills, metacognition, self-regulated learning, goal-setting
      5. Social Skills
         Interpersonal skills, empathy, cooperation, assertion, and responsibility

        These factors point to learning-to-learn competencies that can be developed
in and by learners. Learning engineering teams should keep in mind that productive
mindsets and behaviors can be reinforced or undermined by their designs. Helping
learners understand that many aspects of successful learning, such as strategy and
effort, are under their own control fosters agency to learn. A productive mindset may
be encouraged by giving process-focused feedback in an environment that treats
mistakes as an opportunity to reflect and learn.
        Not only is it important what the learner thinks about learning in general.
It’s also important how the learner thinks about their own learning while learning.
Metacognition is thinking about one’s own thinking; it’s where learners actively
reflect on activities and their own mental processes.
        Metacognition in learning includes knowledge of one’s own learning strengths
and weaknesses as well as the demands of the learning at hand. It also includes
self-regulation—the ability to correct errors when appropriate and the ability to re-
flect on one’s own learning.36 Learners need insight into their own learning before
they can effectively plan or self-regulate.
        Metacognition is often a learned behavior; it doesn’t come naturally to every-
one. Learners may not be aware of their own internal dialogue or how important it
is for the learning process unless explicitly taught to attend to it. Like other learned
behaviors, that internal dialogue is influenced by culture and previous experiences,
and the type of self-monitoring that’s most productive will vary by academic or
professional discipline.
        Scaffolded metacognition as learners are learning may prompt them to reflect
on or articulate what and how they’re learning. Did I already know that? How would
72 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     I explain that to someone else? Does it conflict with what I thought I knew or thought
     I could do? How well do I know this? How well do I know how to do this? On what
     parts of this do I need help or more practice?

           An emphasis on metacognition must accompany instruction in each of
           the disciplines because the type of monitoring required will vary. In
           history, for example, the student might be asking himself, “who wrote
           this document, and how does that affect the interpretation of events,”
           whereas in physics the student might be monitoring her understanding
           of the underlying physical principle at work.37

            When designing learning experiences, it’s equally important to understand
     subject-matter experts’ internal dialogue and to model that thinking for novices.
     Such domain-specific thinking supports domain-specific chunking (sorting and
     grouping of knowledge into long-term memory). Learning engineering teams can
     bundle a learning experience with metacognitive coaching and modeling, such as
     contextually appropriate conceptual frameworks and reflective exercises. This can
     help learners recognize and evaluate their own conceptualizations or practices.
            In August 2020, Laura Fries, Ji Li Son, Karen Givvin, and James Stigler
     published the paper “Practicing Connections: A Framework to Guide Instructional
     Design for Developing Understanding in Complex Domains.” Based on what research
     suggests about how experts are able to organize and connect chunks of knowledge,
     they suggest a practical framework for helping learners practice connections:

           The building blocks of this transferable knowledge, sometimes referred
           to as schemas [or mental models], emphasizes the connections between
           abstract relations (such as hierarchies, embedded categories, and func-
           tional systems) rather than lists of discrete facts and procedures. For ex-
           ample, expert physicists’ schemas for a range of problems situations are
           organized by fundamental relationships [for example, the relationship of
           work to energy] rather than by superficial surface-level details specific
           to problem contexts. Experts also have fewer and more interconnected
           schemas.

           To help learners think more like experts, the authors suggest incorporating
     features of scaffolding and instruction that explicitly prompt learners to build con-
     nections between a domain’s core concepts, key representations of those concepts,
     and the contexts and practices in the world, for example, how physics is used in the
     real world by physicist and engineers.
                         Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 73




                                        !!!"
Mia and Kai each had individual experiences that led to their own learning as well as
shared experiences and cultural influences that likely had some common impact on
those unique journeys. Every experience that a learner has influences their brain and
their ability to learn new things. At a macro level, the culture in which the learner
is situated can also impact learning—in positive and negative ways. Culture refers
to the shared beliefs, social forms, and material traits of a racial, religious, family,
or other social group; and the integrated pattern of human knowledge, belief, and
behavior that depends upon the capacity for learning and transmitting knowledge to
succeeding generations.38


    Learning does not happen in the same way for all people
   because cultural influences pervade development from the
           beginning of life. – How People Learn II 39


       The bottom line is that people bring a set of beliefs, behaviors, motivators,
feelings, prior knowledge, prior misconceptions, and mindsets to every new learning
experience, and these are influenced by the experiences formed in the communities
in which they live. People can compartmentalize their cultural identities, adopting
more than one set of cultural norms. For example, a student may reflect one set
of behavioral habits and beliefs when in a school or work setting and a different
set at home. However, while this tendency to compartmentalize may be helpful to
counteract negative external influences on learning, it can also hinder the transfer of
learning to new contexts.
       Learning takes place within a social context. Even independent learning where
a learner isn’t interacting with another person is influenced by social and cultural
expectations. Remember, there’s no learning from scratch. Mia’s understanding of
elementary school mathematics was shaped by her prior experiences of playing with
blocks and playing store.

      An individual’s development is affected by the environment in which
      she lives—including not only the family and other close relationships
      and circumstances but also the larger contexts in which families and
      communities are situated.40
74 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



            In addition to culture, the contextual conditions during learning experiences
     matter. Disruptions, such as forced remote learning in 2020 due to the COVID-19
     pandemic, can have positive impacts for some learners and negative impacts for
     others. Learning engineering includes creating conditions that promote learning.
     That goes beyond just creating instructional materials. Some learning engineering
     challenges involve creating an appropriate culture and context of learning within an
     institution, organization, or school.
           • Does the learner feel safe?
           • Is the learner hungry, too cold, too hot, sick, stressed?
           • Is the environment distracting?
            The conditions don’t need to be perfect, and the environment doesn’t need to
     be comfortable for people to learn. Air conditioning and three meals a day aren’t
     prerequisites. However, a person experiencing severe hyperthermia or malnutrition
     probably will need some food and a lower body temperature before doing any pro-
     ductive learning.
            Similarly, while stress is a necessary and important factor in human develop-
     ment, chronically high levels of stress, without buffering, derail healthy brain devel-
     opment and impact school and work performance.41 In the wake of the September
     11, 2001 attacks on the United States, Pamela Cantor co-authored a study that found
     more New York City school children were traumatized by their experience of grow-
     ing up in poverty than by what they had witnessed on that terrifying day. Her orga-
     nization, Turnaround for Children, applies learning science to help schools counter
     such negative influences. According to Cantor, “It’s impossible to feel curious, for
     example, while also feeling threatened.” The good news, she says, is that science
     also tells us that the brain is malleable and given the right environment, children and
     adults can learn the skills and mindsets for success in learning and in life.


                                            !!""
     The learner model is a dynamically updated profile of the learner used for diag-
     nosis, feedback, coaching, and prescription of learning activities. In one-on-one
     tutoring, the tutor mentally constructs a learner model based on observations and
     interactions with the student. Data-driven learner modeling in adaptive instruction-
     al systems similarly uses student interaction data to build explanatory models of a
     learner’s cognition, metacognition, and motivation. No matter the time in their life,
     this type of adaptive data-driven support could have provided both Mia and Kai with
                        Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 75



the types of feedback and learning experiences that would have better supported
their individual and collective learning journeys.
       Teachers, tutors, learning coaches, and adaptive learning systems can provide
good guidance and feedback when they understand where a learner is on the path-
way toward mastery, what misconceptions they have, and where there is room for
improvement. The right kind of observation and measurement gives the visibility
needed to optimize feedback.

      Data-driven learner modeling is “use of student interaction data
      to build explanatory models of elements of learning (e.g., cognition,
      metacognition, motivation) that can be used to drive instructional
      decision-making toward better student learning.” 42

      A learner model includes not only information about a learner’s progress but
insights into the learner’s thinking, knowledge gaps, and misconceptions. A study
of middle school physical science teachers found “that teachers who know their
students’ most common misconceptions are more likely to increase their students’
science knowledge than teachers who do not.” 43
      Likewise, learning experiences can be engineered to approximate what’s
going on inside the learner’s mind and respond accordingly. Platforms like Duolingo
use data about the difficulty of a task in combination with learner model data to
predict the likelihood of a learner answering the next prompt correctly.
      Gaining visibility into learner mastery and misconceptions often is achieved
through formative performance assessments. A best practice is to embed continual
measurement of learning within learning activities rather than present assessments
as separate events. Great teachers, tutors, and intelligent tutoring systems first
determine if the learner’s response indicates mastery of a competency, and then
if not mastered, they use follow-up assessment items or metacognitive activities
to unpack the misconception or imperfection in the learner’s thinking. With this
information the tutor or system can provide the right kind of feedback and follow-on
learning activities.
      To reach this granular level of understanding—this level of visibility into
learners’ thinking—requires well-defined competency definitions and a well-defined
knowledge base of what can go wrong for learners in mastering each competency.
      It’s not enough to know if a learner understands or can do something. We
also want to know how well they can use their competence to address new kinds of
problems (transfer) and how well they’ve retained their competence for long-term
use. We also want to know what barriers exist, blocking the way to mastery, and
76 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     what possible strategies might overcome those obstacles. Similarly, because part of
     the journey from novice toward some level of expertise involves the learner’s ability
     to think about their own thinking (and to regulate their own learning), learner models
     can also contain estimates of learners’ metacognitive skills, mindsets, motivations,
     attitudes, and anything else that impacts learning.


                                            !!#"
     In summary, the learning sciences form the bedrock of learning engineering.
     They guide its theories and practices and provide an initial blueprint for designing
     learning experiences. But as important as the learning sciences are, remember the
     lesson from the story of penicillin discussed in the introduction: it takes more than
     scientific discovery to produce innovation at scale.

           Efforts to design effective learning environments and activities cannot
           be based solely on scientifically validated theories of learning: theoreti-
           cal advances are often too slow in coming, too blunt, and too idealistic.
           Engineering and other design-based approaches use faster methods of
           testing innovation. Design-based approaches are goal directed and con-
           textualized and often employ frequent, formative assessments as part of
           iterative design-implement-evaluate-redesign methods. This allows for
           highly responsive, evidence-based course corrections so that it is possi-
           ble to realign solutions to suit local constraints and to resolve on-the-fly
           decisions that are underspecified by prevailing scientific models.44

     Engineers look at everything as a system, and while the learning sciences provide
     the basis for learning engineering, alone they’re not sufficient. Read on, to learn
     more about how the learning sciences join with the other sub-disciplines of learning
     engineering to create a complete system.
• Many learning science discoveries aren’t yet applied at scale.

• People build mental models (also called schemas), which are internal
  representations of the world. Expertise is the process of continually
  improving these and connecting di!erent mental models together.

• There is no learning from scratch. All learning builds on prior knowledge
  and experiences, and these are influenced by culture and context.

• Learning is di!erent for everyone, and di!erent topics and developmental
  levels call for di!erent kinds of learning activities.

• Optimal learning takes place when the difficulty level is just right. By
  adding sca!olding (like hints), learners can complete activities they
  couldn’t otherwise. That’s when some of the best learning takes place.

• Cognitive factors, such as executive function and metacognition, a!ect
  learning. Executive function is related to working memory—or System 2,
  the more deliberate kind of memory.

• Using working memory takes e!ort. It creates cognitive load. Too much
  cognitive load can interfere with learning.

• Over time, experts learn to rely more on the mental models stored in their
  long-term memory—System 1, the faster, automatic memory.

• Knowledge, skill, dispositions, habits of practice, and even intelligence
  are trainable to a significant and meaningful degree.

• You can learn to be an expert learner.

• Metacognition refers to “thinking about thinking.” Metacognitive skills, like
  self-regulation, can be learned, and it greatly improves learning outcomes.

• We can’t see inside learners’ heads to know if they’re learning, but we
  can build learner models from assessments, which let us infer those
  unobservable learning events. These models can be “built” in a teacher’s
  mind or via data-driven computational methods.

• Learning is di!erent for everyone.




             LEARNING ENGINEERING APPLIES THE LEARNING SCIENCES

                    KEY POINTS
78 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Endnotes
     1 Simon, Herbert A. “Job of a College President.” Educational Record 48, no. 1 (1967): 68–78.
     2 Duschl, Richard A. Taking Science to School: Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8.
       Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2007. https://doi.org/10.17226/11625
     3 McLeod, Saul. “Cognitive Dissonance.” Simply Psychology. February 05, 2018.
       www.simplypsychology.org/cognitive-dissonance.html
     4 Maskiewicz, April Cordero and Jennifer Evarts Lineback. “Misconceptions Are ‘So Yesterday!’”
       CBE Life Sciences Education, 2013. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3763002
     5 Johnson-Laird, PN. “The History of Mental Models.” In Psychology of Reasoning: Theoretical
       and Historical Perspectives, edited by Ken Manktelow and Man Cheung Chung, 179–212.
       London: Psychology Press, 2004. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203506936
     6 Smith, John P., Andrea A. diSessa, and Jeremy Roschelle. “Misconceptions Reconceived: A
       Constructivist Analysis of Knowledge in Transition.” The Journal of the Learning Sciences 3, no.
       2 (1993): 115–63. www.jstor.org/stable/1466679
     7 Koedinger, Kenneth R., Albert T. Corbett, and Charles Perfetti. “The Knowledge-Learning-
       Instruction Framework: Bridging the Science-Practice Chasm to Enhance Robust Student
       Learning.” Cognitive Science 36 (2012) 757–798. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x
     8   Bransford, John D., Ann L. Brown, M. Suzanne Donovan, and James W. Pellegrino, eds. How
         People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School. Washington, DC: National Academy Press,
         2003, 32. https://doi.org/10.17226/9853
     9   Gladwell, Malcolm. “Complexity and the Ten-Thousand-Hour Rule.” The New Yorker, August 21,
         2013. www.newyorker.com/sports/sporting-scene/complexity-and-the-ten-thousand-hour-rule
     10 Fries, Laura, Ji Y. Son, Karen B. Givvin, and James W. Stigler. “Practicing Connections: A
        Framework to Guide Instructional Design for Developing Understanding in Complex Domains.”
        Educational Psychology Review 33, no. 2 (2020): 739–762.
        https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-020-09561-x
     11 Bransford et al., How People Learn, 115.
     12 Adapted from Wikipedia, “Neuron,” last modified August 7, 2011, https://commons.wikimedia.
        org/wiki/File:Neuron.jpg, and from US National Institutes of Health, “Nerve Tissue,”
        https://training.seer.cancer.gov/anatomy/nervous/tissue.html.
     13 Cook-Harvey, Channa. “The Science of Learning and Development and Its Implications for
        Transforming K-12 Education.” International Association for K-12 Online Learning. Aurora
        Institute. May 2018. www.inacol.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/iNACOL-Leadership-
        Webinar-May-2018.pdf
     14 In Mind in Society, Vygotsky defined the Zone of Proximal Development as “the distance
        between the actual development level as determined by independent problem solving and the
        level of potential development as determined through problem solving under adult guidance or in
        collaboration with more capable peer” (p. 86).
         Vygotsky, Lev Semenovich, and Michael Cole. Mind in Society: Development of Higher
         Psychological Processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978.
         As quoted from Shabani, Karim, Mohamad Khatib, and Saman Ebadi. “Vygotsky’s Zone of
         Proximal Development: Instructional Implications and Teachers’ Professional Development.”
         English Language Teaching 3, no. 4 (2010): 237–248.
         https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1081990.pdf
                            Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 79



15 “Flow (Csíkszentmihályi).” Learning Theories. February 4, 2017.
   www.learning-theories.com/flow-csikszentmihalyi.html
16 Bransford et al., How People Learn, 104.
17 Poon, Jennifer Davis. “Part 1: What Do You Mean When You Say ‘Student Agency?’” Education
   Reimagined, September 11, 2018.
   https://education-reimagined.org/what-do-you-mean-when-you-say-student-agency
18 Merriam-Webster. “Executive Function.” Accessed November 27, 2021.
   www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/executive%20function
19 Kahneman, Daniel. Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011, 20.
20 McLeod, Saul. “Multi-Store Model of Memory.” Simply Psychology. January 1, 1970.
   www.simplypsychology.org/multi-store.html
21 Melton, Arthur W. “The Situation with Respect to the Spacing of Repetitions and Memory.”
   Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 9, no. 5 (1970): 596–606.
22 Settles, Burr, and Brendan Meeder. 2016. “A Trainable Spaced Repetition Model for Language
   Learning.” In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
   Linguistics, Berlin, Germany, August 7 12, 2016, 1848–1858. Stroudsburg, PA: Association for
   Computational Linguistics. https://aclanthology.org/P16-1174.pdf
23 IGI Global. “What is Conditional Knowledge.” Accessed December 29, 2017.
   www.igi-global.com/dictionary/conditional-knowledge/5277
24 Bransford et al., How People Learn, 44–49.
25 Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 238.
26 “Timeline of Cognitive Tutor History.” Cognitive Tutor Authoring Tools: Timeline of Cognitive
   Tutor History. Carnegie Mellon University. Last modified 2015.
   http://ctat.pact.cs.cmu.edu/index.php?id=timeline
27 Koedinger, Corbett, and Perfetti, “The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction Framework.”
28 Kessler, Aaron, Melissa Boston, and Mary Kay Stein. “Exploring How Teachers Support Students’
   Mathematical Learning in Computer-Directed Learning Environments.” Information and Learning
   Sciences 121, no. 1/2 (2019): 52–78. https://doi.org/10.1108/ILS-07-2019-0075
29 “15-1132.00 - Software Developers, Applications.” O*NET OnLine. US Department of Labor.
   www.onetonline.org/link/summary/15-1132.00
30 Goodell, Jim and Janet Kolodner. “Learning Sciences: Concepts for Learning Engineering.”
   Prototype Card Deck Prepared for the IEEE ICICLE 2019 Conference on Learning Engineering.
   https://drive.google.com/file/d/13XqSu3BMMHWd0_pRut7cuoijG6vK1pHC/view
   See also: Goodell, Jim and Janet Kolodner. “Learning Science Cards.” In Proceedings of the 2019
   Conference on Learning Engineering,Washington, DC, May 20–23, 2019.
   http://sagroups.ieee.org/icicle/wp-content/uploads/sites/148/2020/07/ICICLE_Proceedings_
   Learning-Engineering.pdf
31 Wikipedia. “Synaptic Plasticity.” Last modified September 21, 2021.
   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synaptic_plasticity
32 Wikipedia. “Non-Synaptic Plasticity.” Last modified November 16, 2011.
   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-synaptic_plasticity
33 Wikipedia. “Neuroplasticity.” Last modified December 8, 2021.
   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuroplasticity
80 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     34 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. How People Learn II: Learners,
        Contexts, and Cultures. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2018.
        https://doi.org/10.17226/24783
     35 Farrington, Camille A., Melissa Roderick, Elaine Allensworth, Jenny Nagaoka, Tasha Seneca
        Keyes, David W. Johnson, and Nicole O. Beechum. 2012. Teaching Adolescents to Become
        Learners: The Role of Noncognitive Factors in Shaping School Performance: A Critical
        Literature Review. Consortium on Chicago School Research. Chicago, IL: The Chicago University
        Consortium on Chicago School Research. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED542543.pdf
     36 Bransford et al., How People Learn, 97.
     37 Bransford et al., How People Learn, 21.
     38 “Culture.” Merriam-Webster. Accessed November 18, 2021.
        www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/culture
     39 National Academies, How People Learn II, 22.
     40 National Academies, How People Learn II, 21.
     41 “The Science.” Turnaround for Children. May 3, 2018.
        https://turnaroundusa.org/what-we-do/the-science
     42 Koedinger, Kenneth R., Elizabeth A. McLaughlin, and John C. Stamper. “Data-Driven Learner
        Modeling to Understand and Improve Online Learning: MOOCs and Technology to Advance
        Learning and Learning Research.” Ubiquity, May (2014): 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/2591682
     43 Sadler, Philip M., and Gerhard Sonnert. “Understanding Misconceptions: Teaching and Learning
        in Middle School Physical Science.” American Educator. September 27, 2016.
        www.aft.org/ae/spring2016/sadler-and-sonnert
     44 Sawyer, R. Keith, ed. 2014. The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences. Cambridge
        University Press, 23. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139519526
     45 Closing quotation from Hess, Frederick M. and Bror Saxberg. Breakthrough Leadership in the
        Digital Age: Using Learning Science to Reboot Schooling. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press,
        2013, 32.
        Learning Engineering Applies the Learning Sciences | 81




     Trying to reengineer learning
 without being versed in the basics
 of learning is like trying to improve
brain surgery without knowing much
            about the brain.

                – Breakthrough Leadership
                       in the Digital Age 45
CHAPTER 3


Learning Engineering
is Human-Centered
by Khanh-Phuong!Thai, Scotty!D.!Craig, Jim!Goodell,
Jodi!Lis, Jordan!Richard!Schoenherr, and Janet Kolodner




Learning engineering is a process and practice that applies
the learning sciences using human-centered engineering
design methodologies and data-informed decision-
making to support learners and their development.



What’s “human-centered” within learning engineering?
Human-centered engineering design means designing from the perspective of hu-
mans who will be interacting with implemented designs.1 Learning engineers design
from the perspective of the learners who will engage with designed products:
      • What will keep learners engaged and motivated over time?
      • What support do they need to learn well?
      • How can those supports be provided in ways that simultaneously
        support learners’ mental model building along with maintaining
        their interest, motivation, and engagement and also foster
        positive attitudes, emotions, and identity development?
These are only some of the questions that must be answered to produce effective and
engaging designs that result in engaged and productive learning.
      Establishing deep connections with targeted learners can be difficult. Chapter 2
lays out some of the complexities of how people develop understanding of concepts
and flexible capabilities, and it describes many of the different cognitive, social,
emotional, cultural, and other factors that affect learning. We know that learning is


DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-7
84 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     not simply “tea steeping.” That is, we can’t assume that learners will simply acquire
     knowledge over time as they listen to lectures, work on problem sets, and engage
     in other learning activities. When learning engineers design for learners and their
     learning, they must consider the knowledge, values, beliefs, life experiences, and
     strategies learners bring with them into the learning environment and the difficulties
     inherent in making the inferences necessary for deep understanding and competency
     development. We need to use that understanding to design in ways that invite learners
     in, keep them wanting to participate, and support their learning.
            The learning engineering process (as outlined in Chapter 1) starts with under-
     standing the challenge or problem to be solved and the context in which learning will
     take place. Investigation is needed before beginning to design in order to come to know
     learners’ interests, capabilities, developmental stages, probable prior knowledge,
     everyday experiences, beliefs, support needs, sometimes their living conditions, and
     perhaps other things about them. Investigation also needs to include knowing those
     same things about the facilitators or teachers who will aid the learning process as
     well as the opportunities and constraints presented by the learning context itself (for
     example, the kinds of physical venues learning will take place in and the capabilities
     and beliefs of people who are available to learners in those contexts). Similarly, the
     investigation should also examine the capabilities and constraints imposed by the
     variety of solution stakeholders (for example, the organizations offering the learning
     experiences, the people and organizations available to participate in design, budget,
     and due dates). This knowledge, learned through the initial investigation, defines the
     challenge, and it’s used continuously during design, including when:
           •   Developing potential designs and pieces of designs
           •   Critiquing potential designs and refining them
           •   Deciding between possible designs and design choices
           •   Choosing participants for testing designs
           •   Designing assessments, evaluation approaches, and instruments
     This is done best in conjunction with stakeholders, including learners, teachers or
     other facilitators, those who set policy, and representatives of community organiza-
     tions that may be involved in the designed solution.
            The learning engineering process includes design as a part of the creation
     phase, which itself includes ideation as well as refining, critiquing, culling, and
     choosing among ideas. This, too, is a human-centered process and requires working
     closely with a variety of stakeholders, many of the same ones who collaborate in
     understanding the challenge. Stakeholders who have experienced the challenges
                                      Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 85



being addressed have valuable insights.
       Coming to understand the challenge is an iterative process. Designers do their
best to learn early in the process, but as ideas are developed, design teams must learn
more before making setting requirements. If relevant stakeholders are engaged with
the design team, they often can provide answers to questions that were not addressed
earlier in the process.
       Testing also must be driven in a human-centered way. The learning engineer-
ing team must identify subgroups of the targeted population who should be included
in testing, indicators of progress toward targeted goals, and how to measure progress.
Here, too, stakeholder experience and understanding can help professional learning
engineers identify indicators and procedures for measurement.
       To accomplish all of this, the learning engineering process borrows from
many methodologies, including human-centered design,2 design thinking,3 univer-
sal design for learning,4 learning experience design,5 design-based research,6 and
engineering design.7 At its core, the best designs for learning are informed by pre-
dictions about how learners will interact and function within a designed learning
environment. They’re iteratively tested for efficacy, and data are collected about
learners and elements of their learning environment. (More specifics about bringing
a learner-centered approach to testing through data instrumentation and analysis
can be found in Chapters 5 and 6.) What’s learned from those data is used to refine
designs and design elements.
       In the rest of this chapter, we’ll explore various human-centered approaches
that inform learning engineering. Then we’ll present narratives of three learning
engineering design efforts and how each group addressed challenges inherent in
designing effective learning experiences for their targeted learners.


                                        !!"
A Human-Centered Approach to Learning Engineering
Human-centered design requires at least the following six activities: 8
      1. Observation, consulting the appropriate research literature, and
         interviews to understand the target end users and their environment.
      2. Ideation, coming up with options for addressing the challenge, focuses
         on designing toward what’s learned through those investigations.
86 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



           3. Rapid prototyping is done to make design ideas concrete so they can be
              presented to end users and other stakeholders for comment and testing.
           4. User testing around the prototype is done with the purpose of collecting
              preference and usability data from end users.
           5. Redesign of ideas and prototypes improves on the prototype based on
              those data.
           6. The process is repeated using iteratively more sophisticated prototypes,
              increasingly real environments, and an increasingly diverse set of end
              users and other stakeholders until a satisfactory solution is achieved.
     Through this process, the solution is implemented robustly for use in the real world.
     Human-centered design is informed by and informs approaches to design that come
     from particular disciplines, and some of the particulars of each of those are also im-
     portant to good design for learners and learning. These related approaches include
     user-centered design, user-experience design, and human-systems integration.


     USER-CENTERED DESIGN

     User-centered design is an approach to designing software to make interactions
     between the software and those using it fluid and productive.


     User-centered design has its foundations in the design of human-computer inter-
     faces. Its focus is on the interactions end users will have with software systems.
     Nielsen and Molich asserted that there are “five golden rules” when approaching
     user interface (UI) design: 9
           1. Knowing the end users of the system is critical.
           2. Users should be involved in the design process.
           3. The user interface must be taken into consideration.
           4. Usability is defined, criteria for measuring usability are identified, and
              measurement data are collected and evaluated to assess those criteria.
           5. The design process should iteratively address and fix usability issues.
     The design process is an iterative process of research, design, and user testing, with
     all three focusing on users’ wants and needs. All three components of the process
     might be repeated in each iteration; design and user testing are always repeated.
                                      Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 87



USER EXPERIENCE DESIGN

User experience design focuses on designing experiences that people want to con-
tinue to engage in and return to repeatedly.


User experience (UX) design is rooted in user-centered design but focuses on the
experiences people will have while engaging with the implemented design.10 UX
design focuses on end-user satisfaction and those things that affect how fluidly users
can engage with the designed system. Good UX design:
      •   Is iterative
      •   Includes research, design, and testing
      •   Involves end users in the design process
      •   Requires defining what satisfaction and fluidity mean
      •   Includes criteria and measuring of the extent to which users are satisfied
Game designers use UX design and employ many tricks of the trade for fostering
excited engagement.11 For the gaming industry, end user satisfaction means that
users will continue to return to the game and engage with it and will recommend
it to others. Fluidity has to do with the ease with which users can carry out the
necessary interactions and move on to the next ones. Satisfaction might be measured
by collecting data about time devoted to play, frequency of play, and, perhaps,
participation in web discussions about the game, and the nature of those discussions.
Fluidity might be measured by collecting keystrokes and their timing and looking in
web discussions for content associated with fluidity.
       To design for learner engagement, learning engineers might take advantage
of some of the tricks that game designers use. They might measure satisfaction of
learners engaged in a learning experience by collecting data from discussions learners
are having with each other, the frequency of their participation in learning activities,
their frequency of engagement, and their engagement over time. Particular data to
be collected, of course, will depend on the nature of the learning experience and
the venue in which learners participate. We discuss more about learning-experience
design below. See Chapter 5 to learn about a data collection framework for games
applied to learning, and look at Chapter 15 for a brief discussion on some tricks game
designers use to keep players engaged that can be applied to learning experiences.
88 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     HUMAN-SYSTEMS INTEGRATION

     Human-systems integration focuses on people and systems performing together to
     achieve a set of goals.


     Human-systems integration is an approach applied to system development
     that seeks to optimize total system performance. It’s a philosophy and series of
     processes designed to bring human-centered principles into traditional systems
     engineering.12 Human-systems integration is typically applied to large systems
     that include hardware, software, organizational processes, human personnel, and
     potentially other components (like facilities) that all operate together. It emphasizes
     developing systems that effectively and affordably take advantage of the capabilities
     and limitations of humans.13 Human-systems integration also focuses on a system’s
     life cycle, from its initial conception, through its development and operation, and
     even its eventual sunsetting. Core tenets of human-systems integration include the
     following: 14
           •   Focus on human performance throughout the design process
           •   Optimize the system as a whole, not just as individual components
           •   Maximize benefits while balancing risks and costs
           •   Use multidisciplinary design, including both designers and stakeholders
            Learning engineers designing highly immersive learning experiences may
     need to take into account this full set of tenets. See, for example, the Connected
     Worlds installation at the New York Hall of Science.15 The learning experience
     happens in the context of a highly complex full-room embodied interactive
     simulation. People engaging with the simulation are learning from it; at the same
     time, every engagement they have with it needs to seem instantaneously responsive.
     The design of the system included specialized hardware and software designers,
     learning scientists, learning experience designers, science education experts, and
     science educators. In addition to the traditional learning components, the team needed
     to make a wide range of human-system design decisions, including environmental
     safety, technology maintainability, and development of training for the installation
     staff on how to use and maintain the system.
                                       Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 89




                                         !""
Designing for Variation Across Learners
As Chapter 2 points out, individual learners within a population or cohort differ
in a huge variety of ways that are important to consider when supporting their
learning. They’ve lived different experiences resulting in different zones of proximal
development. They bring different capabilities and foundational mental models to
their learning. They’ve been exposed to different ways of doing things. They have
different interests, different dispositions, and so forth.
       The best educational approaches will work for the vast majority of learners in
a targeted population. Put simply, a good middle-school math curriculum will catch
the interest and support the learning of the vast majority of middle schoolers. A good
piece of EdTech designed to teach storytelling will support the vast majority of those
for whom it’s aimed (whether middle schoolers or second-language learners).
       The same learning activities won’t work for learners of entirely different de-
velopmental levels, interests, or capabilities. Appropriate scope is critical to making
a human-centered approach work, as is determining how much of the variation
across a population can be accommodated in a design. But even within more target-
ed populations, there will always be a wide variety of differences to address. This
means learning engineers need to investigate (before designing), identifying factors
and their variations that will affect learning among the identified population. You
certainly have to identify the most common variations, and you’ll have to design
toward some less common ones as well. Some readers may wonder how to possibly
address the huge variations in capabilities and the support needs across a population.
This is among the biggest challenges that learning engineering teams face.
       Don Norman, a leader in the field of designing human-computer interfaces,
also pointed out a subtle challenge in human-centered design regarding population
variety.16 He argued that no single design can address the needs of all users, and that
if design teams aren’t careful, then human-centered approaches can bias solutions
toward the group participating in its creation. Norman further warned that if a de-
sign isn’t tested with a varied enough set of end users, then this bias will get stronger
across iterations. In the years since Norman pointed out this tension, a variety of
approaches have been developed that focus on addressing the needs of a large por-
tion of the selected population. These include design thinking, participatory design,
and design justice.
90 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     DESIGN THINKING

     Design thinking emphasizes the need for empathy with the population, such as
     recognizing their knowledge, capabilities, needs, and wants.


     Brown and Wyatt define the design thinking process as a combination of inspiration,
     ideation, and implementation.17 The inspiration phase starts with framing and
     scoping the problem and then gathering and synthesizing data. The ideation phase
     takes those data and uses them to generate ideas for possible solutions. Then, an
     implementation phase converges on a solution, builds a prototype, tests, and refines
     the prototype with the focus on delivering the product. The three components of
     the process are interwoven with one another rather than occurring as individual
     steps—the whole process and each component are iterative. While the basic human-
     centered design process (above) was articulated to design physical objects to be
     used by people, design thinking extends design practice into designing processes,
     systems of all kinds, and services. Design thinking practitioners focus on designing
     their products based on what potential users want and need.18
            Design thinking puts great focus on understanding why people do the things
     they do and how they interact with each other. A significant component of the
     inspiration phase includes getting to know or empathizing with the population.
     Design thinking researchers and practitioners have developed sophisticated methods
     and practices for building empathy with the population, for example, learning about
     end users and their interactions in environments. These tools include such techniques
     as personas, customer journey maps, service blueprints, business model innovation,
     and rapid prototyping. Some of these are discussed later in this chapter, and while it’s
     beyond our scope to cover all of them in detail, an overview can be found in Chapter
     12, Human-Centered Design Tools. More recommendations are also available in the
     paper “Design Thinking Methods and Tools for Innovation” from the Design, User
     Experience, and Usability Conference.19
                                      Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 91



PARTICIPATORY DESIGN

Participatory design tells us to include end users, those who know end users well,
and other experts on our design teams.


Participatory design,20 also called co-design,21 focuses on the design team and on
methods for actively engaging the broad range of stakeholders in the design process.
Each of the human-centered approaches in this chapter emphasizes the need to
include members of the targeted user community or learning population in the
design process. Participatory design adds that it isn’t enough to simply involve those
people in the design process; rather, it’s necessary to identify all stakeholders and
actively engage representatives from each stakeholder group in the design process.22
Two common challenges for professional designers are identifying ways of actively
engaging stakeholders who aren’t educated designers and treating these design team
members as integral teammates who bring important expertise.23
       Most of the approaches discussed earlier assume there’s a client who is
contracting with a design team to address a challenge. Participatory design begins
earlier: professional designers and all stakeholders work together to articulate the
challenge and decide which of its aspects to take on, for example, they work together
to identify requirements. They then continue working together to develop solutions.
Participatory design is conceived as having three basic stages that mostly overlap
with the process components of other approaches: initial exploration of work,
discovery processes, and prototyping.24

   ► Initial exploration of work: All stakeholders meet to share ideas and
      viewpoints on the situation being investigated and together develop a process
      for coming to understand the situation. This may include methods such as
      observations, interviews, walk-throughs and organizational visits, and
      examinations of artifacts.
   ► Discovery processes: After data are collected, the team clarifies goals and
      values and agrees on desired outcomes. The goal is to make meaning out of
      the problem solutions rather than to simply describe them.
   ► Prototyping and testing: Professional designers and stakeholders collaborate
      to shape project artifacts to fit into the envisioned problem solution.

The whole thing is an iterative process that involves multiple rounds of design and
feedback.
92 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     DESIGN JUSTICE

     Design justice reminds us to make sure we identify ethnic, racial, class, gender,
     disability, and other variations across our population, that we recognize intersec-
     tions between these, and that we don’t disadvantage particular subgroups more
     than we disadvantage other subgroups.


     Design justice is the newest of these approaches. It seeks to challenge structural
     inequalities and systems of oppression.25 Design justice urges us to consider how our
     designs distribute benefits and burdens and to examine issues of power, penalty, and
     privilege as we design. This enables designers to be more accountable to those who
     are intersectionally disadvantaged (for example, at the intersecting experiences of
     gender, sexual orientation, class, race, ethnicity, disability, and immigration status)
     and to prioritize the needs of those most affected by our designs. Design justice
     requires the following:

        ► In addition to being participatory, our design teams must include designers
           across identities (for example, women, Black communities), as well as the
           intersections (for example, based on race, gender, ethnicity, migration status,
           disability) of those who will be affected by our designs.
        ► We should make sure to iteratively test our designs with members of those
           different groups.
        ► We need to keep track of power relationships as we design (they suggest
           Patricia Hill Collins’ matrix of domination to do this) and design to challenge
           systems of oppression.
        ► We need to be proactive and systematic in inviting people from disadvantaged
           groups to use and critique our designs.

            As well, design justice tenets remind us that anybody can participate meaning-
     fully in design teams if opportunities for participation are designed appropriately.
     Design justice is discussed in more detail in Chapter 7, and the KNO example later
     in this chapter shows participation by community members on design teams.
                                      Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 93




                                        !#"
Designing for Learners and Learning
Learning solutions can immediately use many of the general techniques already
discussed. However, in addition to these, more learning-focused principles and
processes should be considered. Learner-centered design has its roots in user-
centered design but is concerned with learners who will learn from the implementation
of a design rather than on users who will use a design.26 Learner-centered design
also focuses on the design of learning technologies. Several attributes differentiate
computer-aided learners from typical computer users, such as: 27
      1.   Learners have low expertise and capabilities in the task domain
      2.   Learners change in interesting ways during their use of the system
      3.   Learners will be motivated to engage in learning in very diverse ways
      4.   Learners are quite diverse in the support they need for learning
      5.   The most usable computer interactions aren’t always the best ways to
           learn the targeted concepts and skills
      Learner-centered design emphasizes tries to build solutions for the diversity of
learners, in ways that address the gulf between their knowledge and capabilities and
those of an expert, all while keeping learners engaged over time. Learner-centered
design teams include subject-matter experts, teachers, designers, and developers and
they consider usability and learning outcomes. Since the introduction of learner-
centered design, a variety of approaches have added detail to the considerations
involved in designing for learners and learning. These include universal design for
learning, learning experience design, and design-based research.


UNIVERSAL DESIGN FOR LEARNING

Universal design for learning ensures that learners with disabilities and other vari-
ations are considered during the design process.


Universal design for learning began as a framework for designing curriculum ma-
terials and learning technologies so that those with disabilities can also interact with
them effectively and easily.28 More recently, it’s branched out to focus on all kinds of
variations across learners, including social justice and equity issues that go beyond
94 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     disability. Universal design for learning had two foci: (a) providing flexibility in the
     ways information is presented and the ways learners are asked to engage, and (b)
     reducing barriers to learning by providing proper supports. Its goal is to maintain
     high achievement expectations for all learners regardless of disability status.29 As
     required in other human-centered design approaches, it also requires involving end
     users (in this case, those with targeted disabilities) in the design process.
            Ziho Kang is an Associate Professor of Industrial and Systems Engineering
     at the University of Oklahoma. He and colleagues articulated several guidelines for
     accomplishing these goals: 30

        ► Teachers should appropriately and strategically display information using a
           variety of representations, for example, analogy, multiple examples, and using
           a variety of media.
        ► Learners should be able to choose from a variety of modalities for expressing
           themselves and demonstrating what they know and are capable of.
        ► All learners should have a way to engage in every assignment. This means
           that what’s assigned must be doable in some way by all students; there may,
           for example, be different levels of solving a problem so that all can feel
           accomplished, nobody will be overly frustrated, and those who can take on
           more challenges have opportunities to do so.

     Recently, proponents of universal design for learning have realized that many of the
     recommendations they make about designing for those with disabilities also hold
     when designing for equity across those who bring different knowledge, experiences,
     and capabilities to the classroom.


     LEARNING EXPERIENCE DESIGN

     Learning experience design focuses on designing for adult learners and integrates
     instructional design, psychology, neuroscience, design thinking, and UX into its
     methods.


     Learning experience design reflects another broad set of approaches that combine
     elements of adult learning and development, instructional design, psychology,
     neuroscience, design thinking, and UX design.31 Learning experience design can be
     thought of as bringing together UX design and interactive media design principles to
                                      Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 95



design educational experiences.32 Walcutt and Malone claim it’s informed, as well,
by industrial knowledge design, experience design, experiential learning, behavioral
economics, and human-systems integration.33
       When adopting a learning experience design approach to design, designers
should focus on the ultimate goal of the learning experience (such as improving
workplace productivity with up-skilling training versus simply fostering new skills
in employees) as well as the larger context around it. Designers should use holistic
approaches to user-centered design, borrowed from many files, and design holistic
experiences that consider form, function, and aesthetics as well as address senses,
emotions, cognition, personal connections and engagement, and social identity. These
designs should be robust despite the inevitable errors and biases that each person
using the solution will have. And learning experience design encourages designers
to think of a learning solution as a collective system, rather than unconnected events,
learning activities, or design decisions.34


DESIGN-BASED RESEARCH

Design-based research derives from research in the learning sciences and is a
methodology for iteratively making designs better while at the same time adding to
our body of knowledge learning.


At its most basic, design-based research begins with a design that’s informed by
what’s known about how people learn and how to support learning. Designers keep
track of each of the design decisions they make and develop a logic model showing
how the design’s different components are meant to affect and contribute to one
another. Rich data descriptions are collected as the design is being carried out, and
these allow the designers to compare their predictions to what happens in real-world
practice.
       Learning outcomes are usually part of the real-world data collection, and
these are augmented with important snapshots of what learners are doing and
saying. Comparing the designers’ expectations to what’s actually happening during
a learning experience or activity gives insight into what’s happening as expected
(or not as expected) as well as other surprises. Explanations are derived for any
unexpected results, and then refinements are suggested. In cases where explanations
can’t be derived or where not enough is known to suggest refinements, researchers
might be able to identify holes in the theories they’re using. They might engage
96 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     in additional research before moving on and may even, through the data they’ve
     collected, be able to suggest new approaches to the professional community. While
     learning engineers don’t necessarily engage in academic research, new scholarly
     findings on how to better support learning might very well be derivable from a
     learning engineering effort.
            Design-based implementation research is similar to design-based research
     but focuses on adapting designed learning activities for particular contexts.35 For
     example, a curriculum that’s been designed for the general middle-school population
     may need adjustments to work well at a school with a different culture, teachers with
     different backgrounds, or students with different resources than was assumed by
     designers. The same iterative process used in design-based research is used to adapt
     a design for use in special contexts.
            Three big ideas that underlie design-based research (and design-based imple-
     mentation research) are important for learning engineering.

        ► What happens during a learning experience or set of learning experiences
           affects what will be learned by the end. Therefore, evaluation of complex
           designs requires a protocol that lends itself to knowing our intentions and how
           well the design meets them in practice.
        ► Design-based research tells us what design process data to keep track of
           while designing so that issues deep within a component of a complex learning
           experience can be tracked down for refinement.
        ► Design-based research provides us with a method, called conjecture mapping,36
           for keeping track of refinements and reasons for them over time that then
           allows guidelines for supporting learning to be derived and refined.

             We don’t go into detail about conjecture mapping in this chapter (instead
     refer to Chapter 12, Human-Centered Design Tools). Suffice it to say, it’s no small
     undertaking keeping track of all of the design decisions and why they were made,
     how design components interact, expected observable outputs of different design
     components, and how those components together contribute to the results. Tracking
     all of that and the results of using designs in a real-world setting and how interpretation
     of those results inform futures iterations is an even bigger undertaking. Conjecture
     mapping suggests a framework for doing that. (See also Chapter 4, which includes
     some advice about using models for keeping track of complex and complicated
     interactions between parts of designs.)
                                       Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 97




                                         !$"
User-Centered Design Techniques
User- and learner-centered design approaches contribute several methods that are
important to learning engineering, including:
      • Personas as a way of keeping track of variations in the population
      • Prototyping for quickly getting feedback from a community on ideas
      • End user interactions for getting empirical feedback on design decisions
Each of these tools is used in the case studies described a little later in the chapter.


PERSONAS

A persona is a description of a subgroup of people who will interact with one’s
designs or some representative of that subgroup. In other words, a persona is a de-
scription of a fictitious user or learner. One persona is created for each of the major
subgroups of potential users who will interact with the design being created. When
designing for learners and learning, this means creating one to represent each of the
major variations across members of the targeted learner population.
       The set of personas is used during design to decide which of several options
will work better and to guide adaption so that those options work more broadly.
Personas are used during critique, to predict how broadly a design will work, and
they’re used during testing to identify those subpopulations with whom a design
should be tested.
       Personas are developed using data that are collected before design begins,
during the investigative empathy stage. Personas may be the most important
resources created for guiding design: The best designs take personas into account
during ideation, critiquing and idea refinement, and development of test procedures.
The first case study below is from the Age of Learning’s Math Readiness. That
example includes a persona that was developed through interactions with fifty
children, two and three years old, and it illustrates how the persona was used to
guide ideation and idea refinement.
       Included in each persona is a name, photo or sketch, and possible behaviors,
goals, interests, and frustrations—all as learned through data collection. The design
justice approach emphasizes that personas should be created based on the lived ex-
periences of end users (learners in our case) and other stakeholders and not just on
98 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     imagining what their capabilities, needs, and frustrations are. Personas should also
     include other demographic and psychographic information that might affect the ways
     people will interact with or participate in an implemented design.37 Development of
     personas is iterative; they’re refined over time as the team’s understanding evolves.


     PROTOTYPING

     Design ideas can be critiqued, tested, refined, and extended only if they are concrete
     enough so that everyone on the design team, stakeholders, clients, and end users,
     all have the same understanding of a design in progress. This is done through
     prototyping. A prototype brings design ideas to life, providing the certainty
     needed to judge the extent to which requirements are addressed.38 Prototypes might
     represent a design statically or may be created to simulate actions of and interactions
     with a proposed product. One of the adages of the design thinking approach is to
     “prototype early and often.” Making a design idea concrete through a prototype
     allows discovery of design issues early in the process, providing the design team
     opportunities to get support from stakeholders and clients early in the process so
     that necessary refinements of vision and scope can be made early in the life cycle.
     Prototypes range from low-fidelity paper prototypes and wireframes to high-fidelity
     mock-ups that give a visual representation of the system, to interactive high-fidelity
     prototypes that look and act like the actual system but with the necessary code or
     functionality needed to answer questions relevant to the current cycle. Prototyping
     is done for each iterative cycle, with appropriate end users and stakeholders using
     each successive prototype to critique or test the design in progress. The value of
     prototyping is illustrated in the three examples below.


     END USER INTERACTIONS

     End user interactions should happen early and often in the iterative design process.39
     Early on, to check their assumptions and initial ideas, the design team develops
     empathy by getting to know the user population and the context of use. Later, the
     design team interacts with end users to do end-user testing of designs in progress.
     Interactions with end users, whether to understand them or to test designs in progress
     can be accomplished in a variety of ways, including: 40
           • User interviews, or one-on-one interviews with members of a population
           • Surveys and questionnaires that uncover end users’ needs and wants
                                      Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 99



      • Focus groups where a facilitator asks end users a set of questions
      • Card sorting where end users organize topics into meaningful categories
      • Contextual inquiry where a researcher visits end users in their own
        environments to learn about their common practices, interests, and so on


                                        !%"
The case studies in this section and the one following it show how two organizations
have used the suggestions made by the many methodologies listed. The first section
(immediately below) includes the educational game Math Readiness and highlights
empathy, personas, iterative refinement, and end-user testing.


Age of Learning, Inc.’s Math Readiness
Age of Learning, Inc. is a provider of digital learning resources for children ages two
through thirteen. One of those learning resources is My Math Academy, an adaptive
learning game system to help children from pre-kindergarten to second grade (ages
four to eight) build a strong foundation in mathematics. At the time of this story, the
design team for My Math Academy had been working on the set of games for over
five years.
       Working with research partners, the My Math Academy team evaluated its
effectiveness in helping children of their targeted population learn math. They found
that while My Math Academy accelerated math learning in older pre-kindergarteners
(four-and-a-half upon entering pre-K) and kindergarteners and increased their
engagement, interest, and confidence in learning math,41 it was not as effective
with younger preschoolers (not yet four at the beginning of the school year and the
youngest four-year-olds). These children, they found, were missing prerequisite skills
and knowledge needed to benefit from interactions with My Math Academy games.42
The company took this as a call for the development of Math Readiness, a series of
games designed to address mathematics readiness. Math Readiness would be used to
prepare preschoolers to advance to My Math Academy. The target population, they
decided, would be two- and three-year-olds.
       The My Math Academy team, who also were tasked with designing Math
Readiness, is interdisciplinary; its members have expertise in learning sciences,
design research, curriculum development, game design, engineering, art and ani-
mation, learning analytics, and efficacy research. The development process followed
three phases: exploration, iteration, and validation.43 They worked collaboratively
100 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     throughout the phases using Agile development methodologies (see Chapter 11),
     which calls for nimbly iterating to explore a variety of design concepts, test proto-
     types, and validate designs. This case study first presents the process of learning
     about two- and three-year-olds and then the design process for one of the ten games
     that make up Math Readiness. Over the course of getting to know two- and three-
     year-olds and then designing this game, the team conducted nine interview sessions
     with over fifty two- and three-year-olds, some for learning about two- and three-
     year-old children before beginning design and some to test ideas in progress.


     EXPLORATION PHASE

     What does it mean to be two or three years old? The goal of the exploration phase
     was to understand the challenge to be solved and the learner population. The team’s
     approach was grounded in the design thinking concept of empathy. They aimed to
     learn the needs, interests, and capabilities of the children they were designing for:
     Who are these children? How and why do they behave the way they do? What math
     readiness skills do they need to learn? How do they learn? Where and when do they
     learn? How might we engage them in learning? How do we know if and what they
     are learning? This included consulting the research literature on children of this
     age, interacting with children of this age to learn more specifics, and developing a
     persona.
            Exploration began by gathering information from the research literature on
     developmental psychology and design for young children. The team sought to develop
     a basic understanding of what it means to be two and three and how children of
     these ages learn and develop. Two books were particularly helpful: Design for Kids,
     Digital Products for Playing and Learning by Debra Levin Gelman 44 and Designing
     Games for Children, Developmental, Usability, and Design Considerations for
     Making Games for Kids by Carla Fisher.45 Both books offered specific information
     about what children can do at different ages. That information, in turn, helped in
     developing design recommendations that became part of the persona. (See Figure 3.1
     for the persona and corresponding design guidelines.)
            The team interacted with children during several play-test sessions 46 to gather
     more specific information about children in the target age group: What did those
     capabilities the team read in the literature really look like? How do these children’s
     cognitive and motor development impact how they interact with and make sense
     of digital games? What is their level of engagement with different genres of digital
     games? How might they respond to the team’s ideas? These initial play-test sessions
                                    Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 101



set the foundation for the product being developed.
       The team was thinking about designing Math Readiness as an open play
environment, for example, a clubhouse or playground, where children would explore
and visit different areas and play the learning games as they encountered them.
To assess the potential of this idea, in one play session, they observed and probed
as children interacted with a popular commercial digital game called Toca Life.47
Toca Life (https://tocaboca.com) is an open-ended game where children make up
stories as they explore designed village-type worlds. As team members observed,
they looked for answers to a set of specific behavioral questions: How do children
navigate around the village and in the different buildings? What help do they need
to learn to navigate? How well do they navigate within buildings? How capable are
they of dragging on the screen? How else do they interact with items? What do they
enjoy doing?
       The team play-tested with five children ages two and three and found that all
were very engaged with Toca Life and most (four out of five) enjoyed and were able
to drag objects and characters around. Some engaged in more advanced role-play
mechanics of the game such as cooking, using some game items, and interacting
with others. Based on this, they felt comfortable designing a game built around an
open play environment. The children’s interaction with Toca Life also suggested to
the team that they would have to design such that the learning games would attract
the children and keep their attention, as in the open world of Toca Life, the children
navigated around the village sometimes in seemingly random ways. They learned
also that young children tended to drag with two fingers, which led the team to
decide they needed to design the set of games with multi-touch drag.
       Based on reading and observations, the team was now ready to develop a
persona, that is, a model with enough information in it about a child interacting with
a math readiness game that they could use it to predict the way two- and three-year-
olds would interact with different functions in the game they were designing. They
named their initial persona Lily. Her name and the photo in the persona made her
real to the team. The persona includes the amount of exposure to technology Lily has
had, her “catchphrase,” and details about her family. Knowing that Lily (the typical
two- or three-year-old they are designing for) has parents or grandparents available
to her suggests the need to consider that Lily might play alone when her parents give
her the iPad to keep her occupied and that she might play along with grandma (or
other relatives) at other times.
102 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



                                                          Design Guidelines
                                                          (1) Lily understands and enjoys
                                                          making choices but be mindful when
                                                          asking Lily to choose between two
                                                          items.
                                                          If you ask Lily an either-or question such
                                                          as, Lily, would you like cake OR broccoli?
                                                          she will likely say (85% of the time!) that
                                                          she likes the second item (or the item
                                                          most recently o!ered) due to recency
                                                          bias. However, if you ask Lily if she would
                                                          like cake or broccoli and have her point
                                                          to which one she wants, she will choose
Persona Development: Lily                                 the first or second item roughly the same
                                                          amount of times.48
!"#"$%&
• Lily is two years old                                   (2) When using visual communication
• Speaks English at home
                                                          with Lily, be as literal as possible.
• Doesn’t go to school yet
                                                          Lily doesn’t understand the abstract yet.
'%()&*
                                                          She understands icons or symbols that are
• Parents are married; both work
                                                          highly representative of the task we are
• Grandparents actively involved in upbringing
                                                          trying to communicate.49
• Spends time with parents and at daycare
• No siblings                                             Lily cannot read, so pictures and icons are
                                                          even more important. If we need more than
+%,-./.$%0"
                                                          a word or two to describe how something
• “Mine!”
                                                          is supposed to work, the interaction is too
1"-.234/506$"                                             complicated for her.50
• Mom has an iPhone 11
• Dad has an iPhone 11                                    (3) Provide moments for surprise and
• Family has an iPad Air used for
                                                          delight throughout the activity.
  fun and to occupy Lily
• Lily’s parents are less likely to purchase              Lily loves cause and e!ect. Lily gets a kick
  games that she might get bored of quickly,              out of tapping something and watching or
  so she mainly spends time watching videos               hearing it respond.
                                                          She also really likes it when something fun
                                                          and unexpected happens.51

       (4) Because Lily’s fine motor skills are not yet fully developed, object drop
       zones and tap zones for Lily should be large.
       Lily can drag but is liable to miss her target or experience other difficulties. She is better at
       tapping.
       She tends to use multiple fingers or her whole hand to move objects on the screen or to
                                         Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 103



scroll. When possible, make use of full hand gestures instead of relying on the thumb and
index finger alone.52 Her dragging will improve with practice.

Lily still struggles with small, fine gestures since her fine motor skills are not yet fully
developed. She needs big on-screen elements to manipulate. Smaller ones are still difficult
for her to interact with.53
Lily thinks of “pinching” as picking up a small object or something you do to a friend when
you’re mad at them, not as a way to shrink things on a screen.54

(5) Interactive elements should be as prominent as possible, and non-inter-
active backgrounds should not be more visually stimulating than interactive
elements.
Lily cannot yet distinguish main elements of an interface from the details.55 If something
catches her eye, she will focus on it until she becomes frustrated that it doesn’t do anything.
Lily can only see items on screen in two dimensions, not three. Meaning, everything on a
screen looks like it’s in a single, flat plane to her. If we want to use foreground elements,
they should be much clearer and more detailed than anything in the background.56
Lily will get overwhelmed when there are too many items competing for her attention. We
should pick the smallest possible set of easily identifiable elements (like colors) and use
them consistently throughout her experiences.57

(6) Allow Lily to get to the interactions as soon as possible.
Lily is impulsive, acting quickly rather than thinking things through. (She’s still working on
executive function.)58
It is critical for Lily to experiment to learn.59 Experimentation takes many forms: she wants
to try stacking blocks in di!erent ways, test boundaries like seeing how far she can be from
her parents before being called back, or making funny sounds over and over.

(7) Lily enjoys and learns through repetition.
Lily is willing to repeat practice tasks she finds enjoyable while working toward mastery.60

(8) Draw extra attention to any numbers said via voiceover instructions.
We want Lily to think about numbers and hear them as often as possible in everyday
language to accelerate her numeracy development.61




FIGURE 3.1. Initial persona of a two-year-old, which evolved with more detailed and
accurate information as we tested our design ideas. Also included is a summary of
how the Lily persona might respond to cues and therefore how to design for her.
104 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



            Lily’s parents might decide what she will play with, while her grandma may
     give her more choices. These entries in the persona captured variations in the con-
     texts in which children might interact with the game and suggested the need to design
     parent (or caretaker) materials. Figure 3.1 shows the remainder of the persona too,
     such as the different ways Lily might respond to cues and therefore how to design
     for her. It considers that children like Lily are new to the digital world, just learning
     how to interact with touch screens, and developing fine motor skills, attention span,
     and listening skills. Another developmental feature of two- and three-year-olds is
     that they can respond to the same thing in myriad ways; except for that key phrase—
     Mine!—there’s a lot of variation in a single child. Thus, creating a single persona
     with many possibilities was both an accurate way to model an individual child and a
     way to capture variations across different two- and three-year-olds.62
            The information in the persona would be used throughout the rest of the de-
     velopment process to answer questions about what Lily would do or how she would
     react when interacting with suggested game mechanics. It includes a range of be-
     haviors and design suggestions and warnings, covering a large swath of the two- and
     three-year-old population. When the persona could not provide answers to questions
     the team had while designing, they knew they needed to find answers through addi-
     tional observation or testing. As they critiqued and tested their design ideas in later
     iterations, the initial persona evolved to become more detailed and accurate.


     ITERATIVE DESIGN PHASE

     The team had generated game ideas during the exploratory phase, and now they
     began focusing on those ideas: critiquing them, refining them, combining them, and
     generating more. Because Lily enjoys exploring an open play environment, they de-
     cided to organize the learning activities in Math Readiness within an environment
     that Lily can explore. Because Lily enjoys activities where she can make something
     happen, they decided to design a series of highly interactive games, re-playable mu-
     sic videos, and interactive stories. Because their goal is to prepare Lily to learn
     pre-K math concepts and skills, these activities would introduce her to counting,
     tracing numerals, and recognizing and creating patterns. And because it’s not pos-
     sible to predict when Lily will be ready for pre-K math, they decided to include
     activities that they could use to judge her understanding and allow the game to rec-
     ommend her readiness to graduate to My Math Academy. The rest of this case study
     focuses on a single game in Math Readiness called Pattern Pathway. It’s designed to
     help children learn to complete and recognize simple patterns. Because Lily is still
                                    Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 105



developing her motor skills, the team needed to find out more detail about the game
mechanics Lily could be expected to manage. They built a prototype and play-test-
ed it with additional two- and three-year-olds. In addition to assessing their motor
skills, the team wanted to know more about their enjoyment of dragging game com-
ponents across the screen; they were imagining a game where children would drag
game items to make patterns.


FIRST TESTS OF THE PATTERN PATHWAY GAME

Play-testing was to be carried out in three rounds. In the first two, children would be
asked to complete AB patterns, which included only two different items that alter-
nated with each other, like ABABAB. In the third round, children would complete
an ABC pattern (like ABCABCABC . . . ). For the third round, the hit box, which
is the part of an object that can be used for dragging, was smaller than in the first
two rounds. The designers wanted to know how big hit boxes would need to be for
successful dragging and dropping. They also included three additional questions:
      • How well are these children understanding the game-play mechanics?
      • What does it take to get them to understand those mechanics?
      • How much do they enjoy the stories that go with each game?
    The moderator told each child that they’re going to play a game about Shapey
who must go over a bridge and that they’ll help Shapey. (See Figure 3.2.) Then




FIGURE 3.2. Initial prototype of the Pattern Pathway game
106 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




     FIGURE 3.3. Paper prototype of the Pattern Pathway game used in the third test


     children listened to Shapey read the pattern aloud (“red, blue, red . . . ”) and were
     asked to choose the next block to help Shapey get across to the other side. They
     play-tested with six two- to three-year-olds and learned that five out of six were able
     to drag a block (correctly or incorrectly) to the bridge, indicating that dragging is an
     interaction that would work for this age group and this concept. They also found that
     asking the children to help Shapey cross the bridge was simple enough for children
     to understand and was enjoyable for most. There was one child who had some diffi-
     culty dragging the smaller blocks in round three (ABC pattern), which led to the de-
     cision to keep the hit box as large as it was for rounds one and two in all of the games.


     SECOND TEST OF THE PATTERN PATHWAY GAME

     At this point, the team decided to use a playground as the open play environment.
     Children would go to different areas in the playground to play different learning
     games. In the earlier session with Pattern Pathway, they had play-tested with a
     digital prototype, but at this time in the production process, they didn’t have the
     resources to update the digital build with the new playground theme. Instead, they
     built a paper prototype of this new game. (See Figure 3.3.)
            In this test session, they wanted to check what kinds of instructions and visuals
                                     Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 107



would provide clear guidance so children would know what to do to play the game.
(Remember that Lily might not always have an adult with her while playing.) They
play-tested with another six children, one at a time with an adult moderator. Three of
the children were two-year-olds and three were three-year-olds. They hypothesized
that two-year-olds would need more guidance to learn this activity than three-year-
olds, and interactions between the adult moderator and each child would allow them
to figure out what kinds of audio instructions and online cues would be needed. The
moderator asked the two- and three-year-olds to drag step stools to the empty slots;
the question was which game instructions resulted in the children recognizing what
they should do.
       They found that the playground was a fun setting for the children. They were
engaged and enjoyed creating their own narratives using the game pieces. However,
even though the playground was in the background and not in the foreground,
the children were more interested in making Shapey interact with objects on the
playground, for example, taking him down the slide or having him play in the
sandbox, than completing the pattern as they were asked to do. None of the two-
year-olds followed the intentions of the game to complete the pattern. Two of the
three-year-olds attended to the pattern, but only one of the three-year-olds replicated
it. The team didn’t know whether the activity they created was a poor one for these
children, if the activity might have had better results if it had been built digitally, if
the background called too much attention to itself, or if the time lag (between getting
the physical pieces of the game ready and the children actually interacting with the
game) was the problem. Using a digital artifact, the children would have been able
to interact with the game immediately after turning it on. In a digital game, also,
the creators can design what parts are interactable and / or use animation to draw
children’s attention to the game itself.


THIRD TEST OF THE PATTERN PATHWAY GAME

The team developed a digital version of the same game (Figure 3.4) and tested it
with another six children. Would the digital version of the game better grab their
attention? To invite the attention of the children to the game, the screen was designed
with a brighter foreground than background. The playground area in the background
was smaller and had less playground equipment in it. And only objects designed for
the game itself were interactive. When the children dragged the stepping stools into
place, Shapey hopped to the next one. In addition, there was a “helping hand” on the
screen that modeled how to drag a stepping stool.
108 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




     FIGURE 3.4. Digital version of the same game used in the third test


           As expected, children’s interactions with the game were much more focused
     on the game itself: dragging the stepping stools to complete the pattern. All of
     the children attended to the animated objects, and most weren’t distracted by the
     non-interactive elements in the background. The helping hand, however, was not
     something the children understood. The moderator needed to prompt most of the
     children to show them that the hand could show how to drag the blocks. A couple
     of children tried tapping the helping hand. Several children also exhibited “happy
     tapping,” where they rapidly tapped the stool with Shapey on it or the one they
     needed to drag. One child clicked the slide in the background, and one child tapped
     the screen with their entire hand. Most children exhibited joy while playing the
     game, and none tried to exit the game before completion.
           The team made modifications to the game, including (a) changing the
     instructions to make the objective clearer, (b) making game-play mechanics more
     forgiving and allowing children to drag the stools short distances several times to get
     them to where they needed to go, and (c) adjusting the art assets, visual drop zone,
     and animations to help communicate to children where to place the blocks and to
     help them understand the narrative. A screenshot of the next version of the game is
     shown in Figure 3.5.
                                   Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 109




FIGURE 3.5. Final version of the Pattern Pathway game


FINAL TESTING

The next round of play-testing was done with another seven children. The team
found that with their modifications to enable more flexibility in core game-play
mechanics (such as tapping, dragging, swiping), children could easily place blocks
in the path. All children successfully interacted with blocks and dragged them to the
correct drop zones. All completed the pattern on the pathway, though one needed
moderator prompting on the last piece to complete the entire pattern. Children
could interact with the first block and make patterns with minimal or no moderator
support. The interface was simple enough for the children, and the on-screen visuals
were arranged so that children could identify what they could interact with and
were not distracted by non-interactive elements in the game. While children were
not distracted by the background, one did tap around the screen briefly early on, but
once core game play started, he focused on completing the pattern. The children
all exhibited joy and excitement while playing the game. Some children giggled
after dragging the block to the correct location, and most looked to their parents,
apparently proud of having done it successfully.
110 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     PREPARING FOR FINAL RELEASE

     Once validated, the team moved forward to prepare the game for release. Mean-
     while, insights gathered from the design process for Pattern Pathways were added to
     the company’s compilation of research-based design guidelines for informing future
     designs for two- and three-year-olds (Chapter 2). Pattern Pathways and nine other
     Math Readiness games are now available for two- and three-year-olds as a precursor
     to My Math Academy. The team moved on to collect interaction data of children
     playing this and other Math Readiness games, and they are analyzing them to inform
     the next set of improvements.


                                            !&"
     The two cases presented below show steps in designing digital interventions for the
     health sector in Africa. Both demonstrate how participatory design that included
     members of the targeted community of learners contributed to a good final product.
     Both also show different ways members of the targeted community of learners can
     be integrated into design teams and the roles they can play. The first case study is
     of developing a game on HIV education for a stigmatized population who find it
     difficult to trust those outside their community. An iterative participatory approach
     that included a series of meetings created trust and a safe space. The designers
     listened to members of the stigmatized population, their ideas were appreciated,
     and they felt safe to openly contribute sensitive concepts that designers then used
     to make the game engaging and relatable. The second case shows how pictograms
     on design cards enabled health workers who might not have had the confidence,
     language, vocabulary, or literacy to articulate their needs or thoughts to the app
     developers. These cards enabled participation across languages, cultures, and social
     and power structures.


     Leti Arts’ KNO, for Those at Risk for HIV
     This case study describes the design process for an interactive role-playing game
     that was developed in Ghana to encourage behavior change among a population
     that was engaging in risky sexual behavior. Key populations—people who inject
     drugs, men who have sex with men (MSM), transgender persons, sex workers, and
     prisoners—experience major barriers to accessing HIV prevention, treatment, and
     other health services. The challenge was to develop tailored and integrated strategies
                                    Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 111



to educate these populations about positive living and accessing HIV prevention,
care, and treatment services.
       The national prevalence of HIV in adults fifteen to forty-nine years old in
Ghana is 1.7 percent. Among key populations, the HIV prevalence is significantly
higher. For sex workers, it’s 7.0 percent, and for MSM, it’s more than twice that at
18 percent.63 Stigma, discrimination, marginalization, and low levels of HIV knowl-
edge are determinants of key populations’ vulnerability to HIV.
       An international development project in Ghana was implementing several
outreach strategies to overcome these barriers to HIV education and care.64 A role-
playing game was an approach they used to address one key population, MSM. As in
role-play, they would have opportunities to make choices in scenarios that replicated
what they would normally encounter in real life, experience the outcomes of those
choices as game players, and to get to success in the game, come to make decisions
that would keep them healthier and get them the services they needed.
       The project funded Leti Arts to develop the game. The aim of the role-playing
game was to promote safe sex, decrease alcohol consumption, and encourage
counseling and testing. It was named KNO. With such a generic name, they thought,
nobody would find any bias in the name, and nobody for whom it wasn’t intended
would guess what it was about.
       The game provides opportunities for players to take on the role of a character,
Kaycey, as he engages in different social scenarios. Users make decisions about be-
haviors during a night out and consider how to fix mistakes Kaycey makes following
a night of overindulgent partying. They’re told, “Challenges abound in finding help
with his sexual health decisions, but he has no choice but to man up!”


THE PARTICIPATORY DESIGN TEAM: IT TAKES A VILLAGE

Leti Arts is a game design company based in Ghana. They have been building games
for both entertainment and education since 2009. The design team included Leti
Arts staff, a liaison, and experts from the international development organization
that contracted with Leti Arts, representatives of community health organizations,
peer educators, government officials, and, most important of all, members of the
MSM population the game was targeted for. The HIV counselors, peer educators,
members of the targeted group, medical professionals, and others from the different
organizations acted as subject-matter experts. The Leti Arts team members man-
aged the project and developed the app.
       The Leti Arts team included a project manager, a creative director, and
112 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     programmers, developers, illustrators, and sound experts. The project manager man-
     aged the relationship with the international development project that was funding the
     game and coordinated the tasks to ensure expectations were met and deliverables
     were being completed on time. The creative director led the design of the app. Con-
     tent creators worked with subject-matter experts to design the interactive scenarios,
     storyboards, and learning experiences; prepare the scripts for narration; and lay out
     the interactions and flow. The programmers, developers, and UI / UX designers built
     the front end, back end, and game design. Leti Arts has developed gaming software
     and stays current with the latest gaming applications. Working together, the mem-
     bers of the participatory design team developed role-play scenarios, characters, user
     interactions, and alternative experiences of users based on their choices.


     THE FIRST CONTENT DEVELOPMENT MEETING

     The first workshop was held in the capital of Ghana, Accra. The Leti Arts staff
     helped others understand the process of game design and the idea of a role-playing
     game. They guided the team as they identified scenarios for the game. Two ideas
     emerged for game scenarios that would cover all the different topics.

        ► A Safe Night Out. Kaycey goes out for a night on the town; players interact
           with the game to make a series of decisions about his behavior. Depending on
           their choices, they have different experiences and get to make other decisions.
           In this way, they “experience” the effects of decisions around sex and alcohol
           use. As they play the game over and over, they get to make better decisions
           and experience their effects.
        ► The Morning After . . . In this scenario, players role-playing Kaycey consider
           the effects of the choices he made the night before and act out decision-making
           about his sexual health, deciding on the best course of action to ensure he stays
           safe.

            After coming up with the two scenarios, the design team continued by
     creating user interactions and game design flow for each scenario. As they worked,
     the artist was continuously making sketches based on what he was hearing, sharing
     his illustrations, and asking for feedback.
            Between meetings, Leti Arts staff refined the illustrations and worked on nar-
     rations and use of other media, laying out potential routes through the game flow,
     and the technical details underlying those. Sometimes some of the staff made site
                                       Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 113



visits. One site visit was to restaurants, bars, and other venues members of the MSM
community frequent. They sought to learn more about those venues and meet addi-
tional members of the MSM community. Another site visit was to health facilities
where they interviewed health workers to learn about interactions during counseling
sessions. At the next participatory design team meetings, new graphics, versions of
the storyline, and insights were shared. Each new design and insight were opportu-
nities to make the app more appealing and worthwhile to the target population.
       Over time, the subject-matter experts and Leti Arts staff became more com-
fortable with one another. As trust and understanding were established within the
team, new layers of content emerged, and the complexity of what needed to be de-
veloped became more evident.


THE THIRD CONTENT DEVELOPMENT MEETING

In the third content-development session, the members of the MSM population became
quite engaged and excited after seeing the artist’s illustrations and listening to the
storyline. They provided more depth and nuance about the people and interactions
within their community, and the game became more real to them. Discussions
focused on the names of characters, their backgrounds and professions, the clothes
the characters should be wearing, and how they should speak. A suggestion was
made that one set of characters in the out-on-the-town scenario should be dressed
in Lacoste or Polo shirts and have more introverted personalities, and another set
should be dressed in flashier, brighter-colored clothes and be more outspoken and
more likely to try (and encourage) new (and riskier) things. As the drawings became
more real, researchers also learned more about variations across the end users they
were designing for.
       It became clear, as well, during this session, that the initial rounds of illustrations
did not adequately enough represent the characters and scenes. The lead artist made
significant changes to the physiques of the characters after that session, giving them
more defined, shaped, muscular bodies than what he had initially imagined. (See
Figure 3.6.)
       Colors were also discussed and needed to be changed. The initial thematic col-
ors for the app were unappealing to the men from the MSM population. (These are
shown in Figure 3.7 on the left.) They wanted the scenes in the night-out scenario to
be moodier and more suspenseful and use more contrasting colors, more like the de-
cor in the places they frequented and the clothes they wore. Purple was chosen as the
thematic main color, and illustrations were adapted and made consistent throughout
114 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




                                                              FIGURE 3.6. Changes were
                                                              made to the initial design of
                                                              the character after feedback
                                                              from the targeted population




     the app. Figure 3.7 (on the right) shows the opening screen of the night-out scenario,
     and Figure 3.8 shows the decor of the jazz club.
            This session also marked a turning point in support from these design-group
     participants. They now really wanted Kaycey to succeed in changing his behaviors.
     They provided additional feedback and insight on the tasks, interactions, and deci-
     sions in the game, offering more detailed and real-life advice about the types of de-
     cisions people would make in the different scenarios, for example, how men engage
     with the men in a bar, who they go home with, using condoms, and more.


     DESIGNING WITH THE USER IN MIND

     The Leti Arts team went through their own journey of understanding the MSM
     community. In the beginning, this work was based on their preconceived percep-
     tions about the community. As they learned more about the community and began




     FIGURE 3.7. Two possible menu screens were considered for when end users open
     the game. Following design considerations, the initial screen (left) was replaced with a
     more vibrant screen (right).
                                     Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 115



to place themselves in the characters, they
shifted their perspective and how the case
studies evolved. The storyline, characters,
and language used for the narratives and
visualizations were refined through each
iteration.
       The game designers knew that the
game needed a constant balance between
learning and play to hold players’ attention.     FIGURE 3.8. Complementary colors
How could the story be told so that it is         were used in the jazz club
engaging and entertaining while not boring
and still educational? In the end, the scenarios do not overtly suggest to the MSMs
that the app is educating them, but rather, it does so subtly, through narrations, tasks,
and decision points. Members of the MSM community offered their expertise as real
team members, while Leti Arts experts integrated game mechanics and gamification
techniques (points and rewards) to motivate game players and showcase their
emerging expertise in engaging ways.


TESTING THE GAME AND ROLLING IT OUT

The game was tested in two locations: in Accra, the capital, and Kumasi, a region
north of Accra. It was tested with representatives from two populations: peer
educators and potential users. Testing with peer educators resulted in the Leti Arts
team refining the night-out story to incorporate a stronger focus on alcohol abuse.
Dialogue and decisions were added on how much alcohol to drink and if Kaycey
should accept or decline offers from those offering to buy him drinks. Testing with
potential users led to additional dialogue refinement.
       After incorporating additional feedback from the testing, the game was ready
for distribution. To maintain the privacy and security of users, and to make sure they
felt safe playing the game, it was never made available to the public. Rather, it was
distributed by peer educators. Each peer educator was given an access code to share
with the users they are in contact with. New users were invited in by existing users
through SMS or email; they were added to a white-list database, created profiles,
and were given access to the game. The access screen has never depicted anything
that indicates the nature of the game. The data collected included logs tracking dis-
tribution and use of the game. The participatory design approach led to a game that
is relatable and engaging to members of the key population.
116 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Medic Mobile’s Community Health App
     How do you encourage participation in the design process when people who need to be
     members of the design team together speak different languages, come from different
     cultures, have different perspectives, may lack the confidence to speak, or may be
     illiterate? Medic Mobile, a nonprofit organization that builds and deploys digital tools
     to improve health equity worldwide, has developed an approach that brings together
     relevant people across the health sector, including community members, nurses, and
     managers who speak different languages, are in hard-to-reach settings, and who
     don’t have internet connectivity. Medic Mobile uses a human-centered participatory
     design approach to guide use cases, impact workflow design, and build technology
     road maps. They’ve also developed a set of cards with drawings as an integral tool
     in their approach. Participatory design teams use the cards to communicate as they
     develop use cases, work out expected impact, and lay out workflows and technology
     road maps as shown in Figure 3.9.65
             Medic Mobile relies on input from people involved in health care delivery at
     every stage of design and implementation as they identify opportunities and ideate
     health care solutions. Most of their projects focus on health care provider workflows,
     which are complex and remarkably diverse from place to place. Medic Mobile staff
     can sketch workflows, but sketching takes skills that many participants on their
     participatory design teams don’t have. (See Figure 3.10.)
             To assist with the process, their custom-made design cards break down the
     most common elements in health system workflows. This allows even those who
     have never articulated workflows before to make sketches of their workflows quickly
     and easily. Each card has a drawing of a different component of the health care
     system: community members, health care workers, places, technology, and actions




   DEFINE                    IDEATE                  DEPLOY                 MEASURE




     FIGURE 3.9. Medic Mobile’s human-centered approach: define, ideate, deploy, measure
                                               Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 117



                                     REGISTRATION



                                                        ERS
                                                     ND
                                                   MI
                                                RE
                                                                           ON
                                                                       ATI
                                                                    IRM
                                                               O NF
                                                           IT C RT
                                                        VIS REPO
             REFERRAL
                                                                                    IF NO VISIT
                                                                                    CONFIRMATION
                                    FOLLOW-UP
                                                                                    CHEW IS
                                                                                    NOTIFIED

                                                VISIT ATTENDANCE


FIGURE 3.10. Sketch of an SMS-enabled antenatal care intervention
In this example mock-up of the workflow or mechanism of action for antenatal care (ANC) intervention, (1) a
CHW registers a pregnant woman via SMS; (2) software installed at a hospital automatically creates a schedule
of appropriately spaced ANC visits and sends the CHW personalized notifications before each appointment; (3)
the CHW revisits the household to refer the woman for ANC; (4) typically the pregnant woman visits the clinic;
(5) the CHW follows up a few days later and (6) sends an SMS to confirm that the appointment was attended. If
no SMS confirmation is received, the CHW’s manager (the CHEW) is automatically notified. Partners often find
such workflow sketches more participatory and accessible to input (especially across language, culture, and
power barriers) than technical product specifications or detailed written/verbal descriptions alone. New Projects
involve many variations of such sketches as designs for technology and service delivery co-evolve.


involved—such as visits to clinics. These cards are a visual way to engage people in
role-play to guide the articulation process, help facilitate understanding of the work,
and imagine new ways of doing it. For example, the pictures in Figure 3.11 tell stories
about the medicine supply chain (part a), how a community health worker gets to the
community to visit pregnant women and mothers to check how they are doing (part
b), and options for how data are transferred to a ministry of health (part c).
      The cards invite everyone from community health workers to scientists and
policy makers to be active participants in workshops. Anybody can point to or re-
arrange the cards as they speak to explain environments, goals, assets, and pain
points. This experience helps to create a feeling that they are all creating something
together. This is particularly important when working across language barriers. The
design cards take some responsibility from the translators and focus the conversation
on the system being laid out on the table. The teams Medic Mobile puts together in
118 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



                                                              FIGURE 3.11. Medic
                                                              Mobile’s story cards

                                                              TOP PANEL: What does the
!+"                                                           process look like to deliver and
                                                              track supplies to and at the health
                                                              facility or hospital for the nurse
                                                              to administer the medicines?

                                                              MIDDLE PANEL: The community
                                                              health organization is planning a
                                                              visit to the community to check
                                                              on pregnant women and new
                                                              mothers. What transport is available
!,"                                                           to take her to the location? What
                                                              information will she collect?

                                                              BOTTOM PANEL: What technology is
                                                              available (feature phone or laptop)?
                                                              What are the options to transfer data
                                                              to the ministry of health depending
                                                              on access to the internet (send to the
                                                              cloud or collect off-line and sync when
!-"                                                           internet access is available)? What
                                                              data do the ministry want? What type
                                                              of charts and graphs are useful?




      designing applications may have people who don’t speak the same language or come
      from different cultures and countries. It could be people in the same country that don’t
      speak the local dialect, Americans or European international development workers
      involved in projects in rural African communities, or designers from one country
      in Africa, such as from Kenya, working with target communities in other African
      countries where the people do not speak Swahili. Design cards give all parties a
      tool to communicate ideas and explore scenarios in a concrete and tangible form.
             Using these cards to make a participatory approach work means that workflows
      and tools being developed are grounded in the reality of the context and informed by
      input from health workers on the ground. Designs informed by those who carry out
      workflows are more likely to be easily integrated into daily work practices. These
      practices will ultimately lead to creating an improved health delivery system for
      their communities.
• Learning engineering requires human-centered design.

• Human-centered design starts by understanding the challenge from the
  learners’ perspectives and then creates solutions through research-
  based iterative design.

• Learning engineering’s human-centered perspective came from several
  fields including human-centered design, design thinking, universal design
  for learning, learning experience design, and design-based research.

• Learners are the central component in the system of learning, and they
  should be active participants in their own learning.

• Human-centered design is an iterative process that relies on data and
  data-driven decisions. It doesn’t stop with the conception design; it
  continues as details are added, including implementation details.

• For learning, human-centered design typically involves understanding
  learner variability (for example developing personas to refer back to
  during design), making ideas concrete with prototypes, and testing ideas
  iteratively with representatives of the learner population. The process can
  include the following:
     – Empathy development via observing or interacting with learners
     – Co-design, or participation of learners in the design process
     – Translation of ideas to rapid prototypes, for example, design cards
     – Testing ideas quickly with learners, for instance, to ensure the
       learners are meaningfully engaged, for sustainment of motivation
       and engagement, for feelings of being invited into the process, and
       for moving learning forward
     – Iterative refinement with simple prototypes, which become more
       complex and developed with continued user input
     – Iterative refinement during implementation with continued user input

• The mindset of a learning engineering design team should be that the
  product is the learning experience (or the set of conditions in which
  learning can be successful) rather than the content or technology.



                           LEARNING ENGINEERING IS H UMAN-CENTERED

                    KEY POINTS
120 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Endnotes
     1 Boy, Guy A., and Jennifer McGovern Narkevicius. “Unifying Human Centered Design and
       Systems Engineering for Human Systems Integration.” In Proceedings of the Fourth International
       Conference on Complex Systems Design and Management, Paris, December 4–6, 2013, 151–162.
       doi:10.1007/978-3-319-02812-5_12
     2 IDEO. The Field Guide to Human-Centered Design: Design Kit. Palo Alto, CA: IDEO, 2015.
       www.designkit.org/resources/1
     3 Brown, Tim. “Design Thinking.” Harvard Business Review 86, no. 6 (2008): 1–10.
       https://hbr.org/2008/06/design-thinking
     4 Rose, David H., and Anne Meyer. A Practical Reader in Universal Design for Learning.
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press, 2006. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED515447
     5 Walcutt, JJ and Sae Schatz. Modernizing Learning: Building the Future Learning Ecosystem.
       Washginton, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2019.
       https://adlnet.gov/assets/uploads/Modernizing%20Learning.pdf
     6 Anderson, Terry and Julie Shattuck. “Design-Based Research: A Decade of Progress in Education
       Research?” Educational Researcher 41, no. 1 (2012): 16–25.
       https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X11428813
     7 Dym, Clive L. and Patrick Little. Engineering Design a Project-based Introduction, 2nd ed.
       Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2004.
     8 IDEO, The Field Guide to Human-Centered Design.
     9 Nielsen, Jakob and Rolf Molich. “Teaching User Interface Design Based on Usability
       Engineering.” ACM SIGCHI Bulletin 21, no. 1 (July 1989): 45–48.
       https://doi.org/10.1145/67880.67885
     10 Dreyfuss, Henry. Designing for People. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1955.
        Norman, Donald A. Things That Make Us Smart: Defending Human Attributes in the Age of the
        Machine. New York: A William Patrick Book, 1993.
     11 Gee, James Paul. “Learning by Design: Good Video Games as Learning Machines.” E-Learning
        and Digital Media 2, no. 1 (2005): 5–16. https://doi.org/10.2304/elea.2005.2.1.5
     12 Boy and Narkevicius, “Unifying Human Centered Design and Systems Engineering . . . ”
     13 Boy, Guy André. Human–Systems Integration: From Virtual to Tangible. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
        Press, 2020.
     14 Schatz, Sae. “Learning Experience Design.” In Modernizing Learning: Building the Future
        Learning Ecosystem, edited by JJ Walcutt and Sae Schatz, 63–106. Washington, DC: Government
        Publishing Office, 2019. https://adlnet.gov/assets/uploads/Modernizing%20Learning.pdf
     15 “Connected Worlds.” New York Hall of Science. Accessed December 29, 2001.
        https://classic.nysci.org/experiencenysci/exhibits/connected-worlds
     16 Norman, Donald A. Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Everyday Things. New York:
        Basic Books, 2005.
     17 The phrase “design thinking” grew out of a merger between two design firms, David Kelly
        Design and ID Two (see in Brown and Wyatt, 2010, page 33). The design processes these firms
        were using were quite different from standard product design, focusing primarily on designing
        experiences for consumers in addition to products themselves.
            Brown, Tim and Jocelyn Wyatt. “Design Thinking for Social Innovation.” Development
            Outreach 12, no. 1 (2010): 29–43. https://doi.org/10.1596/1020-797X_12_1_29
                                              Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 121



   Knemeyer (2015) maintains that user experience and design thinking have shared roots, though
   the concept of UX precedes design thinking by a decade. Knemeyer even calls them “two sides of
   the same coin” (page 66).
       Knemeyer, Dirk. “Design Thinking and UX: Two Sides of the Same Coin.” Interactions 22,
       no. 5 (2015): 66–68. https://doi.org/10.1145/2802679
18 Cao, Jerry, Ben Gremillion, Kamil Ziebak, and Matt Ellis. UX Design Process Best Practices:
   Documentation to Move Design Forward. Mountain View, CA and Gdansk, Poland: UXPin, 2015.
19 Chasanidou, Dimitra, Andrea Alessandro Gasparini, and Eunji Lee. “Design Thinking Methods
   and Tools for Innovation.” In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Design,
   User Experience, and Usability: Design Discourse, Los Angeles, August 2–7, 2015, 12–23.
   https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-20886-2_2
20 Trischler, Jakob, Simon J. Pervan, Stephen J. Kelly, and Don R. Scott. “The Value of Codesign:
   The Effect of Customer Involvement in Service Design Teams.” Journal of Service Research 21,
   no. 1 (2018): 75–100. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094670517714060
21 Trischler et al., The Value of Codesign.
22 Schuler, Douglas, and Aki Namioka, eds. Participatory Design: Principles and Practices.
   Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1993.
23 DiSalvo, Betsy, Jason Yip, Elizabeth Bonsignore, and Carl DiSalvo, eds. Participatory Design for
   Learning. New York and London: Routledge, 2017.
24 Spinuzzi, Clay. “The Methodology of Participatory Design.” Technical Communication 52, no. 2
   (2005): 163–174.
25 Costanza-Chock, Sasha. Design Justice: Community-Led Practices to Build the Worlds We Need.
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2020.
26 Quintana, Chris, Jim Eng, Andrew Carra, Hsin-Kai Wu, and Elliot Soloway. “Symphony: A Case
   Study in Extending Learner-Centered Design Through Process Space Analysis.” In Proceedings
   of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Pittsburgh, PA, May 15–20,
   1999, 473–480. https://doi.org/10.1145/302979.303136
   Soloway, Elliot, Mark Guzdial, and Kenneth E. Hay. “Learner-Centered Design: The Challenge
   for HCI in the 21st century.” Interactions 1, no. 2 (1994): 36–48.
   Soloway, Elliot, Shari L. Jackson, Jonathan Klein, Chris Quintana, James Reed, Jeff Spitulnik,
   Steven J. Stratford, Scott Studer, Jim Eng, and Nancy Scala. “Learning Theory in Practice:
   Case Studies of Learner-Centered Design.” In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
   on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Vancouver, April 1999, 189–196. https://doi.
   org/10.1145/238386.238476
27 Soloway, Guzdial, and Hay, “Learner-Centered Design.”
28 Rose and Meyer, A Practical Reader in Universal Design for Learning.
29 Patzer, Yasmin and Niels Pinkwart. “Inclusive E-Learning: Towards an Integrated System
   Design.” Studies in Health Technology and Informatics 242 (2017), 878–885.
   https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28873900
30 Kang, Ziho, Mattlyn R. Dragoo, Lauren Yeagle, Randa L. Shehab, Han Yuan, Lei Ding, and
   Stephen G. West. “Adaptive Learning Pedagogy of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) for
   Multimodal Training.” Journal of Aviation/Aerospace Education and Research 27, no. 1 (2018):
   23–48. https://doi.org/10.15394/jaaer.2018.1752
31 Hudson, Jane. “Putting Learning Experience Design into Workplace Learning.” Training and
   Development 44, no. 5 (2017): 7.
122 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     32 Benedek, András. “MindTheGapp™ Between Standards and Practice of Mobile Learning
        Experience Design.” International Journal on Advances in Education Research 2, no. 1 (2015):
        14–36.
     33 Walcutt, JJ and Naomi Malone. “Lifelong Learning.” In Modernizing Learning: Building the
        Future Learning Ecosystem, edited by JJ Walcutt and Sae Schatz, 61–82. Washington, DC:
        Government Publishing Office, 2019.
        https://adlnet.gov/assets/uploads/Modernizing%20Learning.pdf
     34 Schatz, “Learning Experience Design.”
     35 Fishman, Barry, William Penuel, Anna-Ruth Allen, Britte Cheng, and Nora Sabelli. “Design-
        Based Implementation Research: An Emerging Model for Transforming the Relationship of
        Research and Practice.” Teachers College Record 115, no. 14 (2013): 136–156.
        https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ1018453
     36 Sandoval, William. “Conjecture Mapping: An Approach to Systematic Educational Design
        Research.” Journal of the Learning Sciences 23, no. 1 (2014): 18–36.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/10508406.2013.778204
     37 Moule, Jodie. Killer UX Design: Create User Experiences to Wow Your Visitors. Victoria,
        Australia: SitePoint, 2012.
     38 Moule, Killer UX Design.
     39 Roscoe, Rod D., Russell J. Branaghan, Nancy J. Cooke, and Scotty D. Craig. “Human Systems
        Engineering and Educational Technology.” In End-User Considerations in Educational
        Technology Design, edited by Rod D. Roscoe, Scotty D. Craig, and Ian Douglas, 1–34. Hershey,
        PA: IGI Global, 2018.
     40 Cao, Gremillion, Ziebak, and Ellis. UX Design Process Best Practices.
     41 Thai, Khanh-Phuong, Hee Jin Bang, and Linlin Li. “Accelerating Early Math Learning with
        Research-Based Personalized Learning Games: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial.” Journal
        of Research on Educational Effectiveness (2021): 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1080/19345747.2021.196
        9710
     42 Betts, Anastasia, Khanh-Phuong Thai, Daniel Jacobs, and Linlin Li. “Math Readiness: Early
        Identification of Preschool Children Least Ready to Benefit from Formal Math Instruction in
        School.” In Proceedings of the International Academic Forum International Conference on
        Education, Hawaii, January 2020. https://doi.org/10.22492/issn.2189-1036.2020.40
     43 Roughly equivalent to investigation, ideation, and testing in the learning design process diagram
        presented in Chapter 1.
     44 Gelman, Debra Levin. Design for Kids: Digital Products for Playing and Learning. New York:
        Rosenfeld Media, 2014.
     45 Fisher, Carla. Designing Games for Children: Developmental, Usability, and Design
        Considerations for Making Games for Kids. Burlington, MA: Focal Point, 2015.
     46 A play-test session is a session in which play is used to explore or test a set of ideas.
     47 Toca Boca. Toca Life: World. Toca Boca. IoS/Android/Kindle Fire. 2020. https://tocaboca.com
     48 Sumner, Emily, Erika DeAngelis, Mara Hyatt, Noah Goodman, and Celeste Kidd. “Cake or
        Broccoli? Recency Biases Children’s Verbal Responses.” PLOS ONE 14, no. 6 (2019): 1–9.
        https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0217207
     49 Gelman, Design for Kids.
     50 Gelman, Design for Kids.
                                           Learning Engineering is Human-Centered | 123



51 Tech.eu. “Toca Boca - Emil Ovemar (20th May 2014).” Video, 4:52. August 10, 2015.
   https://youtu.be/ONPG7n5AQXQ
   cf. Gelman, Design for Kids.
52 Gelman, Design for Kids.
53 Gelman, Design for Kids.
54 Gelman, Design for Kids.
55 Gelman, Design for Kids.
56 Gelman, Design for Kids.
57 Gelman, Design for Kids.
58 Fisher, Designing Games for Children.
59 Fisher, Designing Games for Children.
60 Fisher, Designing Games for Children.
61 Magargee, Suzanne D. and Judith E. Beauford. “Do Explicit Number Names Accelerate Pre-
   Kindergarteners’ Numeracy and Place Value Acquisition?” Educational Studies in Mathematics
   92, no. 2 (2016): 179–192. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-016-9682-y
62 While the literature on personas suggests developing several personas, each focusing on a
   different subset of the user population, this single persona included what was needed to design
   toward variations across this population in development, use of technology, and interaction with
   caregivers.
63 World Health Organization. “Ghana: HIV Country Profile 2019.” Accessed December 29, 2021.
   Interactive Demographic and Socioeconomic Data. https://cfs.hivci.org/country-factsheet.html
64 FHI 360. Hidden No More: Innovative Approaches for Reaching Key Populations for HIV Care
   and Treatment in Ghana. Durham, NC: FHI 360. www.fhi360.org/sites/default/files/media/
   documents/resource-linkages-ghana-approaches-2016.pdf
65 Holeman, Isaac, and Dianna Kane. “Human-Centered Design for Global Health Equity.”
   Information Technology for Development 26, no. 3 (2020): 477–505.
   https://doi.org/10.1080/02681102.2019.1667289
CHAPTER 4


Learning Engineering
is Engineering
by Avron Barr, Brandt Dargue, Jim Goodell, and Brandt Redd



Learning engineering is a process and practice that applies
the learning sciences using human-centered engineering
design methodologies and data-informed decision-
making to support learners and their development.



Without Margaret Hutchinson Rousseau and her team of engineers and scientists,
large-scale production of penicillin wouldn’t have been possible during World War
II. Many more lives would have been lost, and it might have impacted the outcome
of the war—and the world as we know it today.
       Margaret was a Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) trained chemical
engineer. This chapter features stories from people trained as engineers and who
applied its general principles to learning engineering. Bror Saxberg was trained as
an electrical engineer (at MIT) and medical doctor (at Harvard University) and later
became a learning engineer. Piotr Mitros was trained as an electrical engineer and
later became a learning engineer. He also developed the MITx platform, which is
now Open edX.
       Avron Barr, a co-author of this chapter, is a software engineer, expert in
artificial intelligence, and a learning engineer. Co-author, Brandt Redd comes from
a family of engineers and has applied his software engineering background and deep
knowledge of the learning sciences to the field of learning engineering.
       We will explore in this chapter some common principles that apply to any kind
of engineering—mechanical engineering, civil engineering, chemical engineering,
software engineering, and learning engineering.



DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-8
126 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




                                              !!"
     Bror Saxberg knows a lot about the science of learning and the practice of learning
     engineering. His medical doctorate from Harvard Medical School and doctorate of
     philosophy in electrical engineering and computer science from MIT give him a
     unique background and credibility. After proving to be an expert learner, he took
     on the personal mission to help others learn at scale. Before his doctorates at MIT
     and Harvard, he was a Rhodes scholar, earning a master’s degree in mathemat-
     ics at Oxford University. But his career isn’t limited to academic achievements. He
     has brought his expertise into real-world situations, promoted learning engineering
     practices, and impacted hundreds of thousands of students.
            Bror’s stature and light complexion reflect his Nordic heritage. His father Borje
     “Bud” Saxberg emigrated to the US from Finland on a scholarship from Oregon
     State University. Bud Saxberg joined the faculty of University of Washington in
     1957 after marrying his wife Margaret, a Norwegian student, and after the birth of
     Bror.1 Bror’s father and mother encouraged him to gain a deeper understanding of
     mathematics. As a result, Bror now says “deep exposure to mathematics gave me an
     enormous toolkit to engage and understand the principles and problem-solving of
     engineering.” 2 Additionally, his father’s career as a teacher helped inspire his inter-
     est in teaching and learning.
            After doing research in cognitive science related to human and machine vision
     at MIT’s Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Bror learned about putting people, ideas,
     technology, and finances together into successful organizations while at manage-
     ment consulting firm McKinsey and Company. Later, he applied his knowledge as
     Chief Academic Officer at K12, Inc., a company that provides online curricula to
     virtual charter schools, home-school parents, and schools that want to supplement
     course offerings, and then as Chief Learning Officer at Kaplan University 3 (now
     Purdue University Global, an accredited online college serving 28,000 students with
     175 degree-programs). He was also general manager for the multimedia division of
     DK Publishing.
            More recently, as vice president of learning science at the Chan Zuckerberg
     Initiative, his career moved from cognitive scientist to learning engineer, to one who
     advances the practice of learning engineering at scale, prompting him to remark:

           I rely on scientific research about learning and minds, but I use it to
           solve real problems. I am, essentially, a learning engineer. 4
                                          Learning Engineering is Engineering | 127



       Bror is articulate, precise, and energetic when discussing learning engineer-
ing. His face lights up when talking about how learning works and about discoveries
that lead to better learning.
       He acknowledges that while learning engineering builds on the science of
learning, it’s not limited to blindly applying existing scientific discoveries. As with
any engineering task, we should ask, What’s the science behind this? How do we
use that science to make robust learning environments? And beyond that, we should
look to new experimentation, the collection and analysis of data to understand weak-
nesses in the current approach in context and for specific learners, and to test the
effectiveness of alternative solutions. Engineering also involves making trade-offs
and navigating real-world constraints to achieve practical outcomes. For example,
“‘how do we measure learning progress over short and long time frames?’ Education
[and training] cannot be defined by a few numbers; still, we shouldn’t shy away from
objective information to improve the student experience.” 5 We’ll examine more of
Bror’s story in Chapter 6.


                                        !""
In March 2012 MIT launched the MITx platform, the predecessor to edX, the
massive open online course (MOOC) platform created by Harvard and MIT that
now hosts over 3,000 university-level courses offered by 150 schools, nonprofit or-
ganizations, and corporations. These courses are taken by about thirty-three million
students worldwide. Some courses are offered at no charge. edX runs on the free
edX open source software platform. The global nonprofit, edX is transforming tra-
ditional education, removing the barriers of cost, location, and access. The story of
the Open edX platform is a good illustration of engineering mindsets and methods
applied to a learning solution.
       Piotr Mitros began building MITx in mid-November 2011, and the first course
on it was launched to MIT students less than three months later, in early February
2012. By the beginning of March, the course was available to the world. The coders
had a rapid development cycle, in part because Piotr had been working on the con-
cepts behind MITx (and Open edX) for many years.
       In 2007, as a graduate student at MIT, he worked on a project with Obafemi
Awolowo University (OAU), based in Nigeria. It had thirty-thousand students. The
electrical engineering department had seven-hundred students, and about a dozen
instructors, of whom three were full faculty.
       Even though the faculty were hard working and highly qualified, the
128 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     teacher–student ratios severely limited the traditional education model. Piotr ap-
     plied an engineering mindset to the problem. He came up with models that blended
     technology, peer learning, and human instruction. He wasn’t able to implement these
     at OAU, but they became the basis of the MITx project and eventually the Open edX
     platform.
             In 2007, Piotr discussed this with Rafael Reif, the current president of MIT
     who was the school’s provost then. “At the time, I was a graduate student, with very
     little savings, and no credibility.” It would take a few more years before a project
     would be funded. The time wasn’t wasted, however. Piotr became an early employee
     at a medical imaging startup. There he developed the analog electronics for a new
     medical instrument that can remotely image the surface of the heart, shaving hours
     off of a particular type of atrial surgery and dramatically increasing its accuracy. It’s
     been used on thousands of patients, saving many lives.
             When he built the MITx platform, Piotr had a lot of practical experience
     teaching and training as an engineer but admits he wasn’t an experienced learning
                                       scientist or learning engineer. “Fortunately, I had
                                       support from people who were such experts.” The
 LE AR NIN  G  EN  GIN  EE  RIN G      learning gains achieved on the MITx platform would
  IS OF TE  N  A TE AM    SPO  RT      have been impossible without the contributions of
    IN WH ICH     TH E  LE  AD         others. Piotr spoke to as many experts as he could
 DE VELOP ERS DE PE ND ON              and integrated the most promising concepts into
       OTH ER EX PE RTS                a coherent system. Many of these concepts came
                                       from his thesis advisor, Jerry Sussman (a student of
     SEE CHAPTER 10,                   Seymour Papert’s and a renowned computer science
   TOOLS FOR TEAMING                   educator), David Prichard (a top physics education
                                       researcher with a deep understanding of the science
                                       of how people learn), David’s graduate students
     (especially Daniel Seaton), and Chris Terman (one of the highest-regarded lecturers
     at MIT). In addition, as he had helped Sebastian Thrun launch the original AI
     course that led to his founding of Udacity, Piotr stood on his shoulders and on those
     Sebastian learned from, including Sal Khan and Peter Norvig.
             Critically, this group helped him sort truth from fiction—what we know works
     from what we don’t yet know—which is a key process for any learning engineer and
     one that he wasn’t yet qualified to engage in, as it’s a skill that takes years of careful
     work to develop.
             Engineers need focus to solve complex technical problems like, in the case
     of learning engineering, How can we optimize student learning, engagement, and
                                           Learning Engineering is Engineering | 129



growth? A team approach recognizes the value of others who focus on project man-
agement, human resources, implementation, and other factors of success, allowing
learning engineers to focus on engineering.
       By integrating expert input and prior work, Piotr’s engineering goal for the
design of Open edX was to build an engaging, pedagogically effective platform as
quickly as possible.
       Cost is central to engineering. The design process was to take what was
known about how people learn and come up with simple ways to implement those
techniques in a learning platform where content could be authored at reasonable
cost. He estimates that the cost of content and platform development for the original
Open edX platform and course were roughly a half-million dollars. Jerry Sussman
and Piotr worked more than full time. Chris Terman worked half-time. Anant Agar-
wal probably ramped up to about quarter-time over the course of the project. In
addition, teaching assistants, consultants, and others helped.
       Piotr and the team worked to understand the challenge by sorting through con-
cepts by return on investment, with a large amount of thought on how to implement
effective techniques with low investment into either platform or course development.
The set of techniques he converged on for the original platform were:

      •   Moving from passive to active and then to constructive learning
      •   Complex multi-concept problems
      •   Continuous formative assessment
      •   Remediations for knowledge gaps and misconceptions
      •   Immediate feedback
      •   Mastery learning
      •   Self-paced learning

       This design focused on a limited number of proven learning approaches,
known to be effective for the kinds of courses originally intended for the platform.
Note how this approach contrasts with traditional scientific research that tends to
push into new areas, either researching new interventions or going into further depth
around one intervention. In contrast, good learning engineering uses a broad array
of robust, established techniques based on previous research with well-replicated
results. Engineers also may use data differently than research scientists. For some
scientific studies, outlier data are filtered out as “noise” so that generalized findings
may be discovered. Engineers are more concerned with outlier data, the specific
conditions in which a system tends to fail.
       The scaling of cost is important to learning engineering as well. For example,
130 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     consider how these costs scale:

           • $1 in per-student cost,
           • assuming an average of 1,000 students per course,
           • equals $1,000 cost per course.

           • $1,000 in per-course delivery cost,
           • assuming 1,000 courses on a platform,
           • equals $1,000,000 for the total run-time platform cost.

           • But $1,000 in platform development or maintenance costs,
           • assuming just 1 platform,
           • is still only $1,000 per platform.

     At scale the per-course delivery costs add up, so finding ways to reduce those incre-
     mental costs was a big part of the engineering challenge. For the Open edX platform,
     with millions of students, thousands of courses, and one platform a lot of attention
     was paid to making course creation both economical and effective, and only some
     attention was paid to the platform development costs.
            In many cases, Piotr took techniques from intelligent tutoring systems or adap-
     tive systems and modified them to minimize course authoring costs while retaining
     the same cognitive processes and benefits. For example, Piotr used a combination of
     techniques that allow students to both navigate and contribute to remediations. His
     approach leveraged the MOOC context to crowdsource content tagging, relying on
     learners’ intelligence and a good user interface design instead of machine intelli-
     gence that might take more time and resources to build.
            For the original iterations of the platform, course authoring expertise was not
     a constraint; as a platform designed for MIT professors, there was an assumption
     that the people engineering courses would be able to program and use sophisticated
     technologies. Learning engineering, like other engineering fields, often requires ex-
     pertise in specialized tools. Mechanical engineers use computer-aided design; soft-
     ware engineers use integrated development environments. In this case, the system
     was engineered to make course authoring efficient for expert users, rather than make
     it easy for anyone to author content. It was possible for the original MITx platform to
     be deployed quickly based on the assumption that these professionals would be able
     to invest their time into learning how to properly construct courses using existing
     software engineering tools. It was assumed that course authors could already use
     professional tools like version control systems, Python, data visualizations, and that
     they could effectively apply the learning sciences. Or, if they couldn’t already, it was
                                           Learning Engineering is Engineering | 131



assumed that they’d learn to do so.
       As pointed out in Chapter 1, understanding the challenge includes understand-
ing the context of a learning engineering team. If this project wasn’t contextually
situated at MIT, the challenge might have been constrained by the need for more
usable course authoring tools. In fact, the edX platform now includes edX Studio, a
tool for developing edX courses without requiring software development expertise.
Even so, learning engineering is a team sport and not all members of the team need
expertise in all of the tools. For example, Anant Agarwal captured videos at home,
which he handed off to editors, who in turn handed them off to a student to integrate
into the course. Learning engineering often depends on the skills of a multidisci-
plinary team.


                                          !#"
Engineering is the application of creativity and science to solve problems, and
learning engineering is the application of the learning sciences to creatively solve
problems for learners and learning. Different engineering domains differ in the
problems to be solved and the science to be applied in solving those problems.
Mechanical and chemical engineering apply sciences such as physics, material
science, and chemistry, whereas learning engineering applies, for example, cognitive,
sociocultural, behavioral, and motivational sciences.
      Each engineering domain is unique. There are, however, some overarching
principles that apply to any kind of engineering. Whether it’s software, civil, or
learning engineering, the application of engineering includes: 6
      •   Addressing specific problems
      •   End users who are intended to benefit from the solution
      •   Testability
      •   Maintainability
      •   Integrity
      •   Well-defined external integration
      •   Ethics
      •   Management

      In general, an engineer should: 7
      • Understand the absolutes, context, and “the possible” of ethical practice
      • Be able to communicate with a purpose targeted to a group or population
      • Be aware of the constraints of public, private and academic practice
132 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



           • Be able to apply fundamental science to system applications
           • Be able to execute at all levels of design: problem definition, estimation,
             figure of merit, rules of thumb, and sanity checks
           • Be able to execute total system design for sustainability
           • Be aware of contextual design variables: performance, constraints,
             variation, and process capability
           • Practice through team projects: problem definition, information
             acquisition, data analysis, trade-off analysis, and optimization
            In other words, an engineer must systematically account for all implications
     of the design and the final product built to that design. An engineer must think of
     how the solution will be used and how it will be built—not just what materials are
     used in the architecture but also the processes used in construction. How will it be
     supported and maintained? How could it be misused? To help consider and account
     for both sets of bullets above, the engineering process is systematic and methodical
     with periodic reviews. Knowledge of human nature, trend analysis, and imagination
     also help. This is just as important for learning engineering. In the story above, Piotr
     Mitros’ team had to consider how the learning system design supported instructors,
     teaching assistants, authors, school administrators, information technology admin-
     istrators, and managers—as well as learners. They had to ensure the design was
     applicable for all scales of use, and they had to consider constraints such as privacy
     laws at all levels of use. They had to evaluate risks of data breaches and even cheat-
     ing. Some of that is done through careful, systematic reviews, and some requires
     experimentation and studies.
            One way that engineers manage the complexity of all the unknowns is by
     creating and using models.8 Models may be used as a simpler representation of the
     complex system or to simulate very complex systems in a way that would be difficult
     or costly in the real world. Civil engineers use models of population growth and oth-
     er demographics to ensure solutions are “right sized” for the life of their use. Civil
     engineers, for example, use models of material strength to ensure safety over time,
     even as the population who uses a bridge or road grows. They use models of weather
     as well as models of how materials decay and erode to ensure that their solutions last.
     Some of these models aren’t precise; rather, they’re estimates that usually have a safe
     margin of error that must be understood by the engineer. Some, like models of the
     strength of materials, are as simple as trigonometry tables or even the multiplication
     tables we used when learning math. For many of these models, the engineer must be
     able to extrapolate to a finer level represented in the table.
            Engineering models, such as computational fluid dynamic models are very
                                            Learning Engineering is Engineering | 133



precise, high-fidelity models. They’re used in the aerospace industry to perform tests
and validations on new designs, for example, for wing shapes. These models can
retain the complexities of, and even add more complexities that are difficult or im-
possible to test in the real world. To bring it back to learning engineering, models
of learners can be used to test learning systems or concepts. Piotr Mitros’ team also
used models of learning such as moving from passive to active and then to construc-
tive learning.
       Models are used to describe aspects of a system and mathematical relation-
ships for understanding and analyzing the system. Different models of the same
system may be developed to understand the system from different perspectives. For
example, there could be one model of the edX platform representing learner interac-
tions, another modeling software architecture, another modeling the content used in
a course, and another modeling the data used within the system. (See Chapter 6 for
some interesting stories about how data are used to build models that help optimize
learning, predict learning outcomes, and improve learning engineering products.)
       Engineers have a mindset; they think about problems to be solved as a part of
a system. Systems thinking offers a wide perspective that includes seeing overall
structures, patterns, and cycles in systems, rather than seeing only the separate and
specific events in a system.9 In learning engineering this includes considering the
context in which learning takes place, for example, how the learning environment
impacts a person’s ability to learn. It also includes the learner as a part in the system.
For example, how does the system adapt learning experiences for learners with
widely varying backgrounds and needs? What affordances allow learners to direct
that adaptation? How is a learner’s ability to learn affected by that adaptation?
       Systems of various components add complexity to the overall design. Engineers
manage complexity by thinking of systems as a set of interoperable components
or modules. Modularizing the system allows engineers to divide up the challenge
into less complex subsystems. Modules of a system have design constraints and
tolerances appropriate for the role they play within the overall system. Interfaces
handle the interactions among modules for the system to work as intended. The
system functions when (a) it includes modules to do all of the required functions,
(b) the modules interoperate with properly functioning interfaces, and (c) each
module performs within tolerances (that is, within the permissible limit or limits of
variation).
       Engineers are also concerned with the environment in which the sys-
tem will operate. When designing a system, an engineer may specify the typical
operating conditions under which a component of the system is expected to operate
134 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     and the tolerance or acceptable range in which the component or system is expected
     to function. For example, electronics engineers designing early smartphones might
     have recognized that typical LCD screen components didn’t function when the tem-
     perature was below freezing or above 90° F / 32° C. If the phone was expected to
     work in colder temperatures then the engineers needed to design a way to keep the
     screen from freezing, for example by adding insulation to keep it warmer. If the
     phone was expected to work in warmer temperatures, like in hot climates, then the
     engineers needed to incorporate a cooling module as well as a sensor and an inter-
     face to control when the cooling module turns on or off.
            In trade-off analysis an engineering team makes decisions that balance cost,
     utility, and other factors. An interesting example is energy production using solar
     cells. The more solar energy (sunlight) goes in, the more usable energy you get out.
     So solar cells are most efficient when pointed directly at the sun. You can add more
     solar energy going in through mirrors and lenses, like magnifying glasses, focusing
     the sun directly on the cells. However, heat destroys the cells; they must be kept cool
     for longevity. An engineer of the system must balance everything using trade-off
     analyses. For instance, air conditioning might cool the cells, but how much energy
     does that use?
            Learning engineers also leverage system thinking, trade-off analysis, and
     modular design. They’re also concerned with constraints, tolerances, and operating
     conditions. If the components of a learning solution are designed for one environ-
     ment, and that operating environment changes, the system may need to be re-engi-
     neered to tolerate a different environment. For example, the traditional classroom
     model of instruction wasn’t designed to operate in a global pandemic. The previous
     system had components to address student engagement that failed when the operat-
     ing conditions changed. Even as schools reopened with remote learning and hybrid
     options, student participation levels plummeted. The system components that previ-
     ously supported student participation—physical space, cultural norms, and in public
     K-12 education, truancy laws and bussing—just failed to function during the pan-
     demic. While the system has always failed to effectively engage some students, even
     in districts that were able to ensure devices and connectivity for all students found
     that 20 percent or more of students were not showing up. Just like the engineers of
     the phone with the temperature-sensitive LCD screen, the most innovative colleges,
     school districts, and independent schools designed new modules to supplement or
     replace the parts of their systems that failed under the new operating conditions.
     These learning engineers also developed new sensors and instrumentation to moni-
     tor student engagement within the new remote learning environment.
                                           Learning Engineering is Engineering | 135




                                        !$"
Great teachers, instructional designers, and learning scientists know how important
feedback is to learners as part of the learning process. In Chapter 1, we examined
learning engineering as a process that involves data-informed feedback loops to
iteratively improve solutions for learning. In this chapter on engineering, we can’t
talk about feedback loops without getting into engineering control theory. Conve-
niently, this theory can be adapted to education and training reasonably well as soon
as you get over some vocabulary hurdles.
        Figure 4.1 shows a basic control system. One example might be a cruise control
for your car. In that case, the reference is the speed you want to go, for example, 65
miles per hour. The controller translates that reference to an input value, the throttle
position. Then the system (including the engine, transmission, drive train, tires, and
so on) produces an output, the actual speed of the car.
        In control theory, this is an open-loop control system, meaning that it has no
feedback. To get a predictable output the controller must have a very good mathe-
matical model of the system and the system itself must be very precise. Open-loop
systems are used when the acceptable margin of error is large, for example, for a
cooling fan.
        A car with an open-loop cruise control would slow down as it climbed hills
and speed up when it descended. For more precise control, real cruise controls use
a feedback loop. A sensor detects the output value (the speed of the car) and returns
it to the controller. The controller takes the difference between the feedback and the
reference values and adjusts the input (throttle) accordingly. This is called a closed-
loop control system.
        Mathematically, taking the difference is subtraction so we call this negative
feedback. In contrast, positive feedback sends systems wildly out of control because
it amplifies any error. A familiar example is pointing a microphone at a speaker. The
terrific squeal that you hear is a positive feedback loop.



REFERENCE                              INPUT                             OUTPUT
                    CONTROLLER                           SYSTEM




FIGURE 4.1. An open-loop control system
136 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



           So, when talking about control systems, closed loop is better than open loop,
     and negative feedback is good while positive feedback is bad. The precise engineer-
     ing terminology is the opposite of what we might use in casual conversation. Let’s
     now apply this to education.


     A Personalized Learning System
     If we take the closed-control loop diagram in Figure 4.2 and make a few word sub-
     stitutions, we get a personalized learning system as shown in Figure 4.3. The learner
     is a part of a system that can benefit from feedback. Skills and other capabilities are
     an output that can be measured through assessment (sensor), and the controller in
     the system informs decisions to vary instruction, including instruction in the form
     of formative feedback to the learner.
            For a moment, let’s ignore the feedback loop. In an open-loop learning system,
     a set of learning objectives (such as those established through academic standards,
     competency definitions, or skills descriptors) are translated into instruction in the
     form of textbooks, lectures, and exercises. These activities are delivered to learners
     resulting in skills. Conventional schooling is much like this. To handle a class of a
     dozen or more students, all students engage in the same activities. But remember
     that open-loop systems require a very precise system and a large acceptable margin
     of error. Students come to us with different personalities, talents, preferences, and
     backgrounds. The result is a wide margin of error as illustrated by the spectrum of
     grades assigned at the end of a course.
            Good teachers and good curriculum do better than this. They find ways to pro-
     vide feedback as often as possible and frequently adapt their teaching to the needs of




                                           SENSOR
      FEEDBACK

                                           INPUT                             OUTPUT
     REFERENCE           CONTROLLER                          SYSTEM




     FIGURE 4.2. A closed-loop control system
                                          Learning Engineering is Engineering | 137




                                   ASSESSMENT
 FEEDBACK

                                      INPUT                               SKILLS
STANDARDS           INSTRUCTION                        STUDENT




FIGURE 4.3. Control theory for learning, a personalized learning system

the class or individual students. Good students can also use feedback to adapt their
learning to match the instructional methods being used. Both kinds of adaptation
require feedback from quizzes, assessments, measurements, and observations. To
do this well, the feedback should be compared with the standards for what’s intend-
ed to be learned and instruction adjusted, including instructional feedback, to the
individual learner.


Multiple Feedback Loops
Remember that a system is an assembly of multiple subsystems. Those systems work
independently but also contribute something to the overall system. Additionally, it’s
important to think of a system as being very dynamic. Each subsystem may have its
own feedback control loops as well as the system itself. Similarly, effective learning
has multiple, nested, feedback loops. An inner loop is feedback that a learner receives
immediately while doing a learning activity. An outer loop is feedback that a learner
gets between learning activities, such as new assignments or suggestions for what to
do next. Additional loops can guide the learner on the best paths toward long-term
learning goals connected with personal and career goals. Figure 4.4 shows learner
feedback loops aligned to the levels defined by the Advanced Distributed Learning
(ADL) Initiative’s Total Learning Architecture 10 and as considered in the IEEE’s
Conceptual Model for Adaptive Instructional Systems.
      We can visualize the innermost feedback loops in a process model as shown in
Figure 4.5. In the inner loop, the learner receives feedback while doing an activity.
The outer loop uses data from the activity and other data to inform macro-level
feedback—guidance on the selection of the next activity.
      Now let’s consider three more insights we can gain from control theory: the
138 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



                                             ER TRAJECT
                                      E CARE                OR
                                  TUR                          IES
                                FU      EN T C AR E ER T R AJE
                                    URR                       CT
                                   C         NT IAL  LE          OR
                                        EDE             VEL        Y
                                      CR
                                               N  LE VEL
                                          SSO
                                        LE
                                              TIVITY LE
                                           AC            V




                                                                  EL
                                                                                      LIFE-LONG
                                                                                LEARNING LOOPS

                                                                     R
                                                              LEARNE



     FIGURE 4.4. Learner-centered adaptive instructional systems
     may provide multiple learner feedback loops




                     OUTER
                      LOOP
                                                             PERFORMANCE
                                                                 DATA



                                         A LEARNING ACTIVITY


           ACTIVITY                                 EXERCISE                 FEEDBACK
          SELECTION



                                                                                      INNER
     FIGURE 4.5. Inner and Outer Loops                                                 LOOP
     Adapted from “The Behavior of Tutoring Systems” by Kurt VanLehn, 2006
                                           Learning Engineering is Engineering | 139



role of a transfer function, speed and frequency of feedback, and sensitivity to what
is being measured.


Transfer Functions
A transfer function is a mathematical description of the relationship between the
input and the output of a system. Let’s use the automobile example. The input is the
position of the gas pedal (more correctly called the accelerator pedal, as we’ll see in
a moment). The output is the speed of the car. Pressing the pedal to a certain position
doesn’t directly make the car go a corresponding speed. Rather, pressing the pedal
causes the car to accelerate at a rate proportional to the pedal position. If you keep
the pedal pressed to the floor, the car will continue to accelerate to higher speeds
until it reaches the limits of its construction. (For calculus fans, this means that the
transfer function of a car’s drivetrain involves an integral.)
       The transfer function is important because it’s incorporated into the design of
the controller. When an engineer designs a controller, they use the transfer function
to anticipate what will be the result of a particular input. Typically, they take the
inverse of the function to determine what input is required to achieve the desired
output. Getting back to our example of a car cruise control, some versions have an
option to maintain a consistent distance behind the car in front, adjusting the speed
to match that car. The operator can choose which transfer function is used, consistent
speed, or consistent distance. For those drivers that prefer saving fuel over driving
at a consistent speed, there could be a transfer function based on fuel consumption.
       The educational and training equivalent of a transfer function is a learning
theory—a description of how a learning activity will result in new knowledge.
Learning theories help us select activities that will effectively help a student learn a
particular skill.
       A personalized learning system will inevitably express one or more
learning theories in the selection of activities. It’s important to align the theory
to the population of learners (or learner), domain, and context. There are personal
differences in the way each person learns. In engineering terms, this means that
each learner has their own personal transfer function. And that transfer function
may change over time. (See Chapters 2, 3, 9, 12, and 15 on the learning sciences,
human-centered engineering design, tools for human-centered design, and learner
motivation for useful learning theories for your learning engineering toolbox.)
We can think of people in a school as being parts of a system; feedback can go to
different parts of the system (for example, instructors, learners, tutors, or tutoring
140 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     software). The different transfer functions direct the feedback to different parts of
     the system. An adaptive system might even decide which transfer function to use or
     where to direct the feedback, such as to different controllers, to get optimal results.
     In learning, an adaptive system would direct different feedback to online instruction,
     to an instructor, an advisor or counselor, and to the learner.


     Speed of Feedback
     For feedback to be most effective, it must be frequent, fast, and rich. Feedback must
     come often so that course corrections are made frequently. It must be fast, ideally
     immediate; otherwise it’s too late to affect the learning process. And it should be
     rich. “Incorrect” is not nearly so meaningful as, “You misplaced the negative sign
     in step 3.”
            Frequent, fast, and rich feedback depends on frequent, fast, and rich assess-
     ments. In conventional schooling, assessment is expensive. It costs a lot of teacher
     time to compose, administer, and score assessments. This is an excellent opportu-
     nity to apply technology. Computer supports can minimize the effort required to
     compose, administer, and score assessments. And computers can tabulate the results
     into effective teacher and student dashboards. The result is a more personalized and
     effective learning experience. Or, as an engineer might say, more predictable output
     with a smaller margin of error.
            The time from the moment an output is measured to a resulting change in the
     input is called a propagation delay. In educational terms, this is the time from when
     a learner’s capability (such as knowledge or skill) is assessed until the moment their
     activity is affected by the feedback from that assessment. In a traditional math class
     the student does homework one day, submits it the next day, and receives graded
     homework back the next day after that. Thus, the propagation delay is two days
     (or two class periods). Fast feedback means a shorter propagation delay. With more
     immediate feedback, learners have the chance to refine their understanding and ca-
     pabilities more quickly. Measurements that require human grading will naturally be
     slower. Many online learning systems offer near instantaneous feedback.


     Frequency of Feedback
     Frequency of feedback is a measure of how often the output (such as knowledge or
     skill, in our case) is measured and feedback generated. In a traditional classroom,
     mathematics feedback is daily (or once per class period). Some traditionally taught
                                           Learning Engineering is Engineering | 141



courses may only have two or three graded activities in the entire course. However,
this may be a pessimistic way to measure frequency. For example, if students can
check their answers in the back of the book, then feedback is both faster and more
frequent. A more ideal condition gives feedback after each attempted answer, but
this is only better if it’s the right kind of feedback. Research suggests that timeliness
and quality of feedback both matter.11 Of course, this guideline must be applied
judiciously; it’s often worth giving a learner time to make it through to the end of
something instead of interrupting.


Richness of Feedback
A third component of educational feedback is richness. In mathematics, this might
be the difference between being told that an answer is wrong versus being informed
about exactly what mistake was made. In a writing course, it might be the differ-
ence between a simple score versus detailed feedback about how the student might
improve their essay. For job performance, rich feedback would give an employee
insight into how to improve performance and how to recognize an error in the future
and distinguish between a job well done and subpar performance.
       Students can influence all three feedback factors. For example, college English
students who seek help at a writing lab will get faster, more frequent, and richer
feedback than students who don’t make use of the resource.
       Control theory tells us that faster and more frequent feedback compensates for
inaccurate measurements and poorer transfer functions. In education language, this
means that if we can make feedback faster and more frequent then we can compen-
sate for a less-than-perfect learning theory and suboptimal assessments. Of course,
it would be nice to have everything—fast, frequent, and rich feedback as well as
good quality assessments and a solid learning theory. But it’s useful to know that
some of these factors can compensate for others. Additionally, we also know from
the learning sciences that too much feedback to the learner can be unproductive for
learning. We know, for example that too much new information produces cognitive
load, and we know that in learning there’s a level of desirable difficulty.
       Physical and electronic systems are designed using filters and dampers to
prevent over-correcting. For example, if the feedback to the controller in a car’s
cruise control system were too precise it would continuously apply the brake and
then the gas, the brake and then the gas. In signal processing, a filter is a device
or process that removes some unwanted components or features from a signal. A
damper may be used to reduce the amplitude of mechanical vibrations in a physical
142 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     system, such as a soft pedal on a piano or the shock absorbers on a car.
             One-on-one tutors have a lot of raw data in various formats and fidelity levels
     while observing a learner working on a problem. They watch carefully as the student
     makes mistakes. Great tutors will not immediately correct a learner but give them a
     chance to discover their own errors and self-correct. The tutor is, in effect, acting as
     a filter or damper and a controller.


     Sensitivity to What’s Being Measured
     Feedback loops are a very effective tool—so effective that if the wrong thing is being
     measured or the wrong feedback is offered then the wrong skill will be optimized.
     A recent manifestation of this are complaints in United States K-12 education about
     “teaching to the test.” The concern is that because summative tests are used to eval-
     uate schools then the only skills that will be taught are those that are on the test. This
     concern is valid. Multiple studies have shown that a focus on conceptual understand-
     ing results in better test performance than test-focused instruction.12
            The problem with determining the right feedback is also manifest in the com-
     bination of skills that a particular problem might require. For example, a mathemat-
     ics story problem might require reading, visualization, and problem-solving skills in
     addition to the ability to solve the resulting mathematical equation. To offer effective
     feedback to a learner’s wrong answer, the system (whether human or automated)
     must be able to detect which of these skills wasn’t applied properly. One way to
     determine the root cause of the wrong answer is to examine the answers given for
     similar questions. If the root cause still can’t be deduced with enough certainty to
     provide good instructional feedback, some adaptive instructional systems may se-
     lect other questions to test the possible root causes. In many cases, the analysis
     requires interacting with the student to discover the steps they followed to answer
     the question.
            It’s tempting isolate skills and only assess one at a time. There are two reasons
     why this won't work. First, most learning goals involve applying multiple skills to-
     gether. Second, the demand for some skills simply can’t be eliminated. For example,
     nearly every assessment requires reading and following directions. Similarly, most
     real-life situations require the application of multiple skills learned to varying de-
     grees of competence.
                                          Learning Engineering is Engineering | 143



APPLYING FEEDBACK LOOPS
To summarize, engineering offers us the following insights about using feedback in
education and training:
   ► Select and use appropriate models, understanding the limitations of each.
      Choose your learning theory deliberately and measure its effectiveness.
      Iteratively adjust the model based on data.
   ► Use multiple levels of control loops with various feedback mechanisms.
      Adapt not only to what the student has and has not mastered but to the
      individual learning patterns and affinities of each student. Provide quizzes
      and other knowledge checks as well as tests.
   ► Fast and frequent feedback can compensate for lower quality in other
      areas of the system. This can hide problems. You may think you have a
      good learning theory when, in fact, fast feedback is making the difference;
      however, it’s also an opportunity to make deliberate trade-offs.
   ► Ensure the control loops use the proper outputs as feedback. Be sure you
      are measuring what you think you are measuring. And remember that every
      assessment measures multiple skills.
   ► Feedback loops based on data also inform the iterative learning engineering
      process. (See Chapters 5 and 6 on data instrumentation and analysis for a
      deeper discussion on this.)



                                       !%"
The first course on the edX platform was a course on circuit design. In place of
lectures, the Open edX platform had learning sequences, which interleaved short
videos, text, exercise, and interactives.
        Engineering relies on prototypes before fully developing solutions. Often this
starts with paper prototypes that sketch out wireframes of an idea and then to
rough models before implementing a minimum viable product (MVP) that can be
tested with a small set of users. The MITx platform was designed as such a prototype.
Piotr was surprised when the first prototype worked well. The course team received
strong positive feedback from a pilot group of on-campus students, and a month
later, strong positive feedback from online students. (Indeed, 98.6 percent of alumni
rated the course as good as or better than an in-person experience.) Obviously, there
144 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     was a sample bias and experimenter bias to the early results, but they were sufficient
     to raise $60 million funding for the edX project.
            In the prototype platform, courses were designed based on constructive
     learning—closely related to but not to be confused with constructivist learning
     theory, which is the idea that people actively construct or make their own
     knowledge.13 In contrast, constructive learning uses flexible technology that allows
     learners to connect new information to their prior knowledge in the modality that’s
     most effective for them. A presentation might walk students through a derivation,
     but ideally, students themselves would do the work through interwoven exercises.
            In practice, the constructive feedback approach was too time-intensive with
     regard to professional development for course instructors. Anant Agarwal, who cre-
     ated course videos, also ran one of the larger research groups at MIT’s Computer
     Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory and was director of the laboratory.
     He had around ten hours per week to record videos and the original approach was
     a change from his teaching style. These constraints called for a different approach.



     ENGINEERING ALWAYS INVOLVES CONSTRAINTS. Every problem
     to be solved has limits that must be considered when designing and
     developing the solution. These constraints may include limited resources,
     time, or technology to develop the solution. Other limits can be based
     on the learner populations to be served and contextual factors in the
     environments where the solution will be implemented. Engineering design
     also must consider engineering tolerance—the permissible limit or limits
     of variation of any component in the system. Each module or component
     of a system should only allow variations that don’t significantly a!ect the
     functioning of the overall system in a negative way, within the intended
     implementation conditions.14


            Based on the constraints, most of the learning sequences in the edX circuit
     design course came to be designed as simple understanding-check exercises inter-
     woven with lecture-style presentations, albeit with a screencast of a slideshow deck
     annotated with a digital stylus. This change led to active learning—still ahead of
     traditional university courses—but not as much of a constructive learning approach.
            For the homework assignments in the course, Piotr did a survey of past
     problem sets for the MIT version of the course. He found that the vast majority
                                          Learning Engineering is Engineering | 145



of problems could be adapted into either numeric responses, circuit schematics, or
equation responses. He built technology to support equations and numeric responses,
while Chris Terman built a circuit schematic editor and simulators. Note that he did
not implement multiple choice questions, since those did not allow for the model
of mastery learning designed for the course, where students could make as many
attempts as they needed to answer open-ended questions.
      Jerry Sussman put an incredible amount of time into creating the problems
themselves, which were complex, multi-concept analysis and design problems. Of
note, many problems had multiple solutions. For example, given a very basic prob-
lem like picking a pair of resistors for a resistive divider that attenuates a voltage
threefold, all that matters is the ratio of the resistors. As a result, many problems
could be graded by short Python scripts. (While these set a high bar for expertise to
the engineering of the course content, a five-line script doesn’t add significant time
to content creation for experienced programmers. This further highlights learning
engineering as a rigorous, skilled discipline and team sport.)
      The platform was designed to support iterative improvement of courses based
on data. Every action in the course was collected, archived, and preserved, including
context in an engineered (and since well-documented) format. The system supported
A/B testing of learning activities, randomly assigning alternative experiences, and
collecting data to determine which worked best. It had a pluggable architecture for
components (XModules, later renamed XBlocks) which allowed for creation of a
variety of learning experiences. As of this writing, the open-source community has
authored hundreds of XBlocks that plug into the Open edX platform.


                                       !&"
Design patterns are repeatable solutions to commonly occurring engineering
problems. A civil engineer is familiar with common bridge architectures and
which types work best in certain contexts. In software engineering, design patterns
establish best practices and promote shared understanding that improves the quality,
consistency, and maintainability of code. Software engineers use named design
patterns so that everyone on the team can work together and employ consistent
coding approaches based on those known patterns. Learning engineering teams can
also use design patterns; for example, the learning sciences concepts in Chapter 9
lend themselves to design pattern templates. Here’s an example design pattern for a
deliberate practice technique (with constructive feedback) applicable to tutoring or
coach contexts.
146 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Example Design Pattern: Deliberate Practice

     Deliberate practice with feedback is a pattern of learning often employed with a
     human or software-based tutor or coach. It supports learning and development after
     the learner has gained initial conceptual understanding of the problem space. It can
     be paired with other learning modalities such as worked examples and as part of a
     cognitive apprenticeship process. This design pattern helps learners retain knowl-
     edge, apply knowledge, and build expertise.

     Applicable Contexts: Artificial, online, simulated, and real-world environments

     Inputs: Data about learner needs and prior learning

     Instrumentation: During the learning experience, data are observed and collected
     about the conditions that require a learner response as well as each learner response

     Design Considerations: How will observed behaviors and learner performance be
     used to adapt the problem and / or problem space (performance challenge) based on
     learner variability and progress? Which implied learning events or behaviors are
     most relevant, such as demonstration of mastery, motivational factors, or trying to
     game the system?

     Pattern:

       1. Ideally, begin with a baseline prediction about the learner’s competence* and
          prior learning; use this to assign a problem or performance task at an appro-
          priate level of difficulty. If this information is unavailable then fill the baseline
          model through other means, such as by collecting data via a pre-test.
       2. Use historical data, algorithms, or human (expert) insights to predict the prob-
          ability that the learner will demonstrate competence on the problem or task at
          any given time based their prior learning, performance, or forgetting curves.
       3. Use a pedagogical or andragogical model about learner development for the
          desired skill mastery, for example, sequencing from novice to expert in a



     * Intelligent tutoring systems may use knowledge inference analytics, such as knowledge
       tracing, to establish predictions about learner competence. (See Chapter 18 for a
       discussion.) A reusable competency definition and measurement criteria may be
       predefined for the skill or task. (See Chapter 8.)
                                          Learning Engineering is Engineering | 147



      domain, controlling the level of difficulty for a task or problem, addressing
      common misconceptions, or controlling cognitive load. Iteratively improve
      this model using data collected from learners who attempt the problems or
      tasks.
  4. Assign or present problems or performance tasks at a level of desirable diffi-
     culty and with adaptations (like hints) appropriate for the learner’s variability.
  5. The learner responds to a problem or part of performance task.
  6. Observe the learner’s responses and indicators of, for example, affective states
     (like boredom or confusion), engagement, or system abuse (gaming).
  7. Give unrequested or requested feedback as needed. Sometimes the feedback
     is informed by a learner’s mistake or misconception demonstrated in the pre-
     vious attempt. Sometimes feedback is requested, such as in the form of a hint.
     In all cases, feedback is informative, motivational (considering the learners
     emotional state and response), timely, elaborate, effective, and strategic.
  8. Learner reattempts the problem task until completed successfully or the an-
     swer / task is demonstrated by the tutor.
  9. Assign additional problems or performance tasks with adjustments based on
     new data from the prior attempt. (That is, repeat the process from step 4.)
  10. Continue this process until the learner has demonstrated mastery of the re-
      quired competencies.


                                        !'"
The need to apply engineering principles to the development of learning experiences
and learning conditions has never been greater. Part of meeting that need is the
emergence of the learning engineer as a distinct profession. Traditional models
of developing and delivering instruction are increasingly breaking down under
changing conditions in the world, such as shifts in the economy and employers’
need for new kinds of talent. Schools, institutions, and training organizations are
already under enormous pressure to adapt. A global pandemic and innovations in
information technology have changed how everyone works and learns.
       What will it mean to be a citizen and contributor in a future world that’s
changing at an accelerating rate? How can systems of learning be developed to
equip people for this constant change? Even academic systems that were considered
state of the art for previous generations failed to meet the needs of many. How can
148 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     the science of learning be applied at scale so that all people have opportunities to
     reach great learning outcomes, opportunities that thus far have been afforded only to
     some? Just like it took engineering to scale the production of penicillin during World
     War II, and it took engineering to produce and distribute the COVID-19 vaccines, it
     will take engineering to develop and scale the systems of learning that are needed by
     future populations of humanity.




           A professional engineer is competent by virtue of
           his / her fundamental education and training to apply
           the scientific method and outlook to the analysis and
           solution of engineering problems.

            . . . His / her education will have been such as to make
           him / her capable of closely and continuously following
           progress in his / her branch of engineering science
           by consulting newly published works on a worldwide
           basis, assimilating such information and applying it
           independently.

            . . . His / her education and training will have been such
           that he / she will have acquired a broad and general
           appreciation of the engineering sciences as well as
           thorough insight into the special features of his / her
           own branch.


                                 – Conference of Engineering Societies
                                    of Western Europe and the United
                                            States of America, 1961 15
• Science aims to discover truths about the world. Engineering aims
  to create scalable solutions to problems that work within a range of
  conditions. Engineering is a systematic problem-solving process.

• Constraints (like cost or time) and trade-o!s are central to engineering.

• Learning engineering requires engineering mindsets, including a systems
  perspective, ability to envision the future, and a scientific approach.

• Systems are designed using models of various degrees of fidelity.

• Scalability of complex systems is achieved in part by breaking them
  into modules, with interfaces between those modules. Interoperability is
  improved by using standard interfaces.

• Parts of a system have design constraints and tolerances.

• In an open-loop system, the controller uses what it knows about the
  conditions to set the input. In a learning context, instructional designers
  use what they know about learners (like age and demographics) and the
  learning content (like media type and depth of knowledge) as inputs.

• In a closed-loop system, the controller compares feedback from the
  output to adjust the input. Similarly, in learning engineering, the outputs
  (how well students are learning) must be compared to the desired output.

• Negative feedback means measuring the di!erence between the output
  and the reference (goal) and adapting accordingly.

• Faster, more frequent, and rich feedback is generally better, especially
  for dynamic systems, and can even compensate for less-than-ideal
  conditions in other parts of the system.

• Use filters and dampers to prevent over-correcting.

• Engineered systems (and human learning) work best with multiple
  feedback loops. Each subsystem may have their own feedback control
  loops as well as the system itself.

• The science of learning is not being applied at scale. Therefore, we see
  the need for a new profession to produce scaled solutions.


                                  LEARNING ENGINEERING IS ENGINEERING

                    KEY POINTS
150 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Endnotes
     1 Gardner, Nancy. “Bud Saxberg’s Half-Century: Business Prof Celebrates 50 Years at the UW—
       and Counting.” UW News. University of Washington, April 5, 2007. www.washington.edu/
       news/2007/04/05/bud-saxbergs-half-century-business-prof-celebrates-50-years-at-the-uw-and-
       counting
     2 University of Washington. “Bror Saxberg.” Alumni Profiles. UW Electrical Engineering. Accessed
       September 29, 2020. https://vannevar.ece.uw.edu/people/alumni/profiles/bror_saxberg.html
     3 Shaughnessy, Michael F. and Bror Saxberg. “Interview with Bror Saxberg.” Educational
       Technology 54, no. 5 (2014): 50–53. www.jstor.org/stable/44430307
     4 University of Washington, “Bror Saxberg.”
     5 University of Washington, “Bror Saxberg.”
     6 Twelves, Tim. “Engineering Principles.” Last modified July 22, 2013.
       http://wiki.c2.com/?EngineeringPrinciples
     7 Kimerling, Lionel C. “3.003 Principles of Engineering Practice.” MIT OpenCourseWare,
       Slideshow. Spring 2010. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-and-engineering/3-003-
       principles-of-engineering-practice-spring-2010/lecture-notes/MIT3_003S10_lec01.pdf
     8 “Model.” In Guide to the Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK). Version 2.5.
       Hoboken, NJ: Trustees of the Stevens Institute of Technology. Accessed October 15, 2021.
       www.sebokwiki.org/wiki/Model_(glossary)
     9 McNamara, Carter. “What Is Systems Thinking?” In Field Guide to Consulting and
       Organizational Development: A Collaborative and Systems Approach to Performance, Change
       and Learning, 405. Minneapolis, MN: Authenticity Consulting, 2006.
     10 Smith, Brent, Jerry Gordon, Trey Hayden, and Andrew Johnson. 2019 Total Learning Architecture
        Report. Washington, DC: ADL Initiative, 2020. www.adlnet.gov/assets/uploads/2019%20
        Total%20Learning%20Architecture%20Report.pdf
     11 Wees, David. “The Role of Immediacy of Feedback in Student Learning.” The Reflective
        Educator, March 31, 2010.
        https://davidwees.com/content/role-immediacy-feedback-student-learning
     12 Learning about Teaching: Initial Findings from the Measures of Effective Teaching Project. Policy
        Brief. Met Project. Washington, DC: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, 2010.
        https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED528388.pdf
        “Improving Math Performance: What Do You Think Is the Single Most Important Factor in
        Dramatically Improving Students’ Math Performance in Your School?” No Child Left Behind:
        Blue Ribbon Schools. US Department of Education. www2.ed.gov/programs/nclbbrs/math.pdf
        Jerald, Craig. “Teach to the Test? Just Say No.” Reading Rockets, November 7, 2013.
        www.readingrockets.org/article/teach-test-just-say-no
        Newmann, Fred M., Anthony S. Bryk, and Jenny K. Nagaoka. Authentic Intellectual Work and
        Standardized Tests: Conflict or Coexistence? Improving Chicago’s Schools, 10. Chicago, IL:
        Chicago Consortium on School Research, 2001.
        https://consortium.uchicago.edu/sites/default/files/2018-10/p0a02.pdf
        Newmann, Byrk, and Nagaoka, “Authentic Intellectual Work and Standardized Tests,” 29.
     13 McLeod, Saul. “Constructivism as a Theory for Teaching and Learning.” Simply Psychology, July
        19, 2019. www.simplypsychology.org/constructivism.html
                                                Learning Engineering is Engineering | 151



14 Phillips, Steven D., Bruce Borchardt, and G. Caskey. Measurement Uncertainty Considerations
   for Coordinate Measuring Machines. Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and
   Technology, US Department of Commerce, 1993.
   https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/IR/nistir5170.pdf
15 Closing quotation sourced from Christensen, Steen Hyldgaard, Christelle Didier, Andrew Jamison,
   Martin Meganck, Carl Mitcham, and Byron Newberry, eds. Engineering Identities, Epistemologies
   and Values: Engineering Education and Practice in Context, Volume 2. Dordrecht: Springer, 2015,
   170.
CHAPTER 5


Learning Engineering
Uses Data (Part 1):
Instrumentation
by Erin!Czerwinski, Jim!Goodell, Steve!Ritter, Robert!Sottilare,
Khanh-Phuong!Thai, and Daniel!Jacobs



./+012134/1321//02134254+4607-/554+18460+-92-/49:+94+66;2/54
9:/4;/+0121345-2/1-/54<52134:<=+1>-/19/0/84/1321//02134
8/52314=/9:787;732/54+184data-informed decision-
making49745<667094;/+01/054+1849:/2048/?/;76=/19@



Data-informed decision-making is an essential and integral part of learning engi-
neering. Without it, you may be doing learning design, but you are not doing learn-
ing engineering. Data-informed decision-making has two parts, instrumentation and
analytics.

   ► Instrumentation is the part of the learning engineering process responsible
      for designing, developing, and implementing the data collection used within
      the learning solution to inform iterative improvements to the learning solution.
   ► Analytics is the part of learning engineering responsible for analysis and use
      of data within the learning solution to inform iterative improvements to the
      learning solution.

Instrumentation uses sensors to capture data along with software and hardware to
process and store data for analysis.

   ► Sensors are human-computer or environment-computer interfaces that cap-
      ture data.


DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-9
154 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



        ► Data pipelines are the software and hardware infrastructure for capturing,
           processing, and storing data.

            The learning engineering process is different from one person or team de-
     signing a course and later having other researchers collect data as part of an efficacy
     study. Learning engineering addresses design of data instrumentation while design-
     ing the solution. The process assumes the data will be used to inform at least one
     iteration of the design.
            The learning engineering process includes understanding what data to collect,
     designing, and developing instrumentation, and using data to inform iterative design
     and development. As we discuss in Chapter 4, engineering involves trade-offs. It is
     not always practical or possible to collect data that might be valuable, and collecting
     more data is not necessarily better.
            In addition to informing iterative design and development, some systems also
     use instrumented data to inform feedback directly to learners, instructors, and other
     stakeholders, including:

           • Feedback to learners and instructors during a learning experience
           • Feedback between experiences to help determine what to do next
           • Feedback that guides the learner on pathways toward longer-term goals
            In some cases, new instrumentation hardware or software doesn’t need to be
     developed. For example, online learning platforms may have built-in software to
     capture learner responses (taps, clicks, or keystrokes) and log that data with context
     metadata to a file or database. The learning engineering team developing a new ac-
     tivity or lesson can use that built-in capability. You may be surprised to learn how
     much about a learner’s experience and cognitive state can be derived from taps,
     clicks, or keystrokes without any special hardware. For example, a learner’s level of
     boredom, confusion, frustration, and concentration may be detectable with just data
     from a keyboard and mouse or touch screen.
            However, a learning engineering team should not assume that current data
     collection is sufficient to answer new questions. “Data must be developed using a
     sound theoretical framing about what it is that we are trying to measure, rather than
     trying to align existing clickstream and telemetry data with constructs after-the-
     fact,” according to the Society for Learning Analytics Research (SoLAR).1
            Other times, the problem to be solved by the learning engineering team re-
     quires development of new sensors, new properties, or new data pipelines to cap-
     ture, store, tag, and process the data. Even if the instrumentation exists, the learning
                    Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation | 155



        HARDWARE           SOFTWARE SENSORS                DATA        ANALYTICAL ENGINES
         SENSORS        AND CONTEXTUAL METADATA         PIPELINES          AND TOOLS

                                           WHO
                                  WHAT ACTION
                                 WHAT ACTIVITY
                                 WHAT CONTEXT
                                  WHAT RESULT
                                                 DATA TRANSFORMATION




                                SOFTWARE
                                 CAPTURE




   RAW INPUT                                                              DATA ANALYTICS



FIGURE 5.1. Hardware and software sensors capture learner actions. Those data are
captured, processed, and stored through data pipelines for use within various analytical
engines and tools.
CC-BY Jim Goodell



engineering team must understand what subset of data is relevant to the current
challenge and what conclusions can be drawn from it.
       Chapter 1 explained that data are important in all parts of the learning engi-
neering process. Curating and defining the kinds of data to be instrumented is part
of understanding the challenge. Instrumentation design and development happen in
the creation phase. The instrumentation is put into use during the implementation
phase to collect data, and instrumented data are used within the investigation phase
to discover opportunities for improvement (new challenges).
       In the challenge and creation phases, a learning engineering team might
consider data requirements as modular challenges leading to the development of
instrumentation. Considerations include the following:

       1.   Question: What’s the question we want answered? Who cares? Why?
       2.   Method: How can we answer it using data? What analysis techniques?
       3.   Metrics: What do we need to calculate from the data to answer?
       4.   Data: What specifically defined data elements are needed for the
            metrics? What algorithm will be used?
156 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



            5. Sources: What systems already collect the needed elements or what new
               instrumentation is needed?
            6. Quality: Check assumptions about the existing sources and
               instrumentation, for example, with data profiling tools. Was it intended
               for a different purpose? Does the quality hold up for the new purpose
               and metrics? Are there other aspects of quality that will impact use of
               existing sources and instrumentation for this new purpose?

            In this chapter, we will examine instrumentation stories from the US military,
     an innovative university, and a company that makes software for children ages three
     to ten. We also will examine open source and standards-based platforms for instru-
     mentation of online, game-based, and experiential learning data.


                                                                                                        What data will
                                                                                                         answer our
                                                                                                      questions? What
                                                                                                     instrumentation do
                                                                                                     we need to collect
                                                                                TE
                                                                                   AM                        it?
                                          S
                                       ER
                                                                                    CREATION
                                   N




                                 What questions do
                                AR




                                 we want the data                                including designing,
                             LE




                                    to answer?                                 building solutions, data
                                                                                   instrumentation,
                                                                                implementation plans



                                                       CHALLENGE
                                                        Understand the
                                                     opportunity to improve
                  INVESTIGATION                       learning or learning
                    with data analysis                     conditions




        What do the data
       tell us? What other
       data could support
              iterative                                                   IMPLEMENTATION
          improvement?                                                        with data collection




                                                         CONTE X T
                                                                                                 Are we getting the
                                                                                                  data we need?

     FIGURE 5.2. Data are considered within all parts of
     the learning engineering process.
     CC-BY Aaron Kessler
                  Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation | 157




                                         !!"
Flight simulators at Boeing, language learning apps like Duolingo, learner
positioning systems like Gooru, and software for middle school mathematics like
ASSISTments and MATHia are all adaptive instructional systems. These systems
capture data about learner experiences and responses and use those data to adapt the
learning experiences. They collect the data using sensors.
       In the case of military training, sensors can be things like heart rate monitors.
For example, well-trained snipers must learn to control their heart rate and shoot in
between heart beats.2 An adaptive instructional system for a sniper might monitor
their heart rate, physical orientation of the weapon, and the accuracy of their shot.
       Training for soldiers, athletes, and astronauts uses many other kinds of
physiological sensors, such as galvanic skin response sensors to measure sweat (an
indication of stress), eye tracking (to monitor what the trainee is paying attention
to), and respiratory sensors. Just because your task must be measured doesn’t mean
your sensor is up to the job. Sensors have limits. One such limit is that sensors can
be obtrusive. Obtrusive sensors might be attached to the body of the learner or very
close to it. On the other hand, unobtrusive sensing means that learners usually are
not aware of the sensor or its function during use. Over time, body-worn sensors that
might be obtrusive at first can become unobtrusive if they aren’t causing discomfort.
       When designing sensor suites to collect data about individual learners or teams,
context matters. It is generally OK to be a bit obtrusive when you are exploring the
efficacy of sensor data as a basis for some inference or prediction of learner states
(for example, emotions, stress or other learner states that influence learning) as long
as it doesn’t interfere with the performance of the task being learned. If you need to
implement your solution in an operational environment, make sure that the sensor
hardware doesn’t interfere with their job.
       Bob Sottilare is familiar with the use of sensors. His work supports the largest
training organization in the world: the US military. At the US Army Research Lab-
oratory, he developed automated authoring, instructional management, and analysis
tools and intelligent tutoring systems (ITSs) and standards for adaptive instruction-
al systems. He is the father of the Generalized Intelligent Framework for Tutoring
(GIFT), an award-winning open source, artificial intelligence–based adaptive in-
structional architecture (see www.gifttutoring.org).
       One of Bob Sottilare’s undergraduate students, while interning for Sottilare,
wanted to investigate the efficacy of measuring heart rate unobtrusively. A few
158 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



                                                  years before that, Bob had been at an
                                                  affective computing conference at the
                                                  University of Memphis and he ran into
                                                  Rosalind Picard, who ran the MIT af-
                                                  fective computing laboratory. (Affective
                                                  here means relating to moods, feelings,
                                                  and attitudes.) One of her grad students
                                                  had developed a method to use webcams
                                                  to measure heart rate. The webcams col-
                                                  lected data through red-green-blue chan-
                                                  nels. It turns out that if the green and blue
                                                  channels were eliminated and the camera
                                                  was pointed just above a person’s eyes,
                                                  the intensity of the red channel could be
                                                  sensed, and a person’s heartbeat could
     FIGURE 5.3. A West Point cadet               be visualized. At first, this seemed like a
     testing two low-cost EEG sensors             much less obtrusive alternative for mea-
     that measure electrical activity of the
                                                  suring heart rate. However, sensors have
     brain and a low-cost eye tracker
                                                  limits. In this case, distance was a major
     Credit: Robert Sottilare
                                                  limitation. As the user moved away from
                                                  the camera, the number of pixels focused
     on the sweet spot of heavy blood flow between and above the eyes lessened and so
     did the accuracy of the heart rate monitor.
             Bob’s intern wanted to see if he could duplicate the informal results explored
     by Rosalind Picard. Bob and his student set up an experiment in the lab to see if they
     could accurately measure heart rate with this method. Like the original experiment,
     they found that distance had a huge effect on accuracy, but there were other factors
     that they didn’t think about beforehand. Low ambient light also affected accuracy.
     They noticed that the experimental trials early in the day showed more accuracy.
     They had the lights turned down in the lab, but the lab faced east, and the morning
     sun meant more ambient light in the morning and less later in the day. Even when a
     sensor is designed to measure a specific factor, such as heart rate, other conditions
     can influence the results. This was especially true in this case. These sensors not
     only suffered in accuracy due to the environment, but also failed to be unobtrusive
     (which was their intended use) because the camera needed to be close to the person’s
     forehead.
             Another time, Bob was working with others to conduct another experiment.
                  Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation | 159



They were collecting galvanic skin response data using Bluetooth. They had run
several trials, which were ruined by dropout (no data available) because the Blue-
tooth communication failed. They also ended up with intermittent and low-quality
data. Sensors have limits. One such limit is that some sensors are not suited to a task,
even if it may seem so at first. Testing sensors to make sure they give desired data
before implementing those sensors is important. Additionally, one sensor may not be
able to give the desired data. Sometimes it takes a mix of sensors to capture all the
data you need to predict a set of states.
       Even if the sensor is suitable for the task, the technology to collect the data
from the sensor may be a limiting factor. For example, an enormous amount of
interesting data could be captured from simultaneous video streams from millions
of users of an app, but the data pipeline required to capture all that data might be
prohibitive. Most solutions require less data to answer the questions related to the
learning engineering challenge. Trade-offs are required.


Sensors and their data pipelines have limits and require trade-offs.


       Another limiting factor is that sensor data can be perishable, just like that donut
you ate this morning. Fresh donuts and fresh data as you need them are always best.
For example, for some military training it may be important to know the person’s
level of anxiety and how well they are coping with a stressful situation. If you have
a really accurate model of the learner’s anxiety based on physiological sensor data,
then it is only good while the individual learner’s physiology is not influenced by
some external factor, like caffeine intake. Since people eat or drink all kinds of
things that change their heart rate, blood pressure, brain function, and other factors.
It is highly likely that trying to use yesterday’s data today will result in significant
errors. In the case of a sniper, starting to drink coffee could completely change what
their biological data look like.


DATA ARE PERISHABLE. A model of the learner’s current state based on
sensor data becomes less accurate with every new experience or external influence.


      The US Army also has developed sensors that capture other kinds of data
such as the radio communication between members of a squad. A team works best
when communication is efficient. These sensors can encode the communication
160 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     to determine how well the team is following communications protocols. Those
     data support constructive feedback during after action reviews to help the squad
     improve its performance. “The After Action Review (AAR) was developed by the
     United States Army in the 1970s to help its soldiers learn from both their mistakes
     and achievements.” 3 The encoding might include what command was given, what
     response was given, the time between command and response, and the contextual
     conditions that prompted the exchange.
           This encoding of raw sensor data resembles the encoding of raw log data col-
     lected by learning apps like Duolingo. The raw data capture that you tapped on the
     screen, and the encoded data add meaning, such as which word you tapped, what
     prompt you were given, when the question was displayed, how long it took you to
     respond, and other information about the prompt that helps Duolingo predict if you
     will get the answer right the next time you are asked to translate the same word.


                                           !""
     Data standards help streamline the development of instrumentation and ensure
     that data collected are comparable. One suite of standards now being maintained
     by the IEEE Standards Association is called Experience Application Programming
     Interface (xAPI) as described in Figure 5.4. Others like IMS Global’s Caliper™ and
     frameworks that have served as de facto standards like the ADAGE Framework are
     described later in this chapter.
           You may be thinking, “I’m not an experienced software engineer. Isn’t instru-
     mentation using standards like xAPI only for full-time geeks?” Not according to
     Anthony Altieri, founder of Omnes Solutions. In a 2017 Learning Solutions article,
     he showed how instructional designers can send an xAPI statement from a web page
     to a Learning Record Store (LRS) with just four steps and just four lines of Java-
     Script code.4

           1. Define a variable that holds the URL address of the LRS and the
              username and password to authenticate
           2. Tell the browser to use that variable for the LRS
           3. Define the xAPI statement
           4. Send the statement

           It may be easier if all you are doing is editing some values in a template web
     page. Chapter 13, Data Instrumentation Tools, includes a simple example.
                       Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation | 161
EXPERIENCE API (XAPI) AND THE LEARNING RECORD STORE (LRS)
   xAPI is an open set of standards used in training and education applications
   for instrumentation. API stands for application programming interface—a
   way for two programs, systems, or apps to communicate.




                                                                           API
                                                                                                   LRS
                 Learner - Paused - Video - at position 23:12




   xAPI is used in both distributed learning and traditional contexts, such as
   courses delivered via learning management systems. First developed by the
   US military’s Advanced Distributed Learning Initiative, xAPI is now part of a
   suite of international standards maintained by the IEEE Standards
   Association.
   xAPI data are structured as statements with these parts: an actor (for
   example, learner), a verb (for example, tapped/clicked), an object (for
   example, a button), with a timestamp, and other relevant info. Consider the
   following examples:

   ACTOR          VERB         OBJECT            RESULT         CONTEXT            TIMESTAMP
   “a learner”    “paused”     “this video”                     “position 23:56”   “2022-06-09T11:20…”

   “a learner”    “answered”   “this question”   “3”            Question URL       “2022-06-09T11:22…”

   “system”       “scored”     “this question”   “correct”      Question URL       “2022-06-09T11:22…”



   The standard support Profiles for different kinds of learning interactions, for
   example, watching a video, answering a test question, or reading an e-book.
   xAPI includes independent LRSs. Data from multiple platforms or activities
   may be collected into a common LRS rather than being locked in the data
   store of a learning management system.


  FIGURE 5.4. xAPI high-level summary. Open source resources are available through
  IEEE SA Open. xAPI Open Source Repository: https://gitlab.com/ieee-sa/xapi
  See also https://standards.ieee.org/initiatives/opensource/index.html
162 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




                                            !#"
     In 2015, a data scientist was working in his office in Glendale, California. It was
     a large, open office crowded with desks, computer screens, and plush toys. There
     were whiteboards with technical sketches of databases sitting next to bookcases
     filled with titles like BIG 3rd Grade Math. Educators, game designers, engineers and
     researchers were hard at work building an educational game for children.
            Everyone was at their desk, focused on meeting the next deadline. It was quiet.
     So, the sudden shrill sound coming from the data scientist’s desk brought a lot of
     attention. Was it an air conditioner? A fire alarm? An airplane taking off? All eyes
     and ears turned to the data scientist’s desk.
            “My apologies, it’s my computer’s fan. The data are just too big.”
            That may have been the moment when big data had arrived at Age of Learning,
     and on the new project they were working on, which would come to be called My
     Math Academy.
            It was around 2015. Big data (and loud fans) had earlier arrived at mobile
     gaming companies like Zynga or Supercell. These mobile app developers already
     had developed a strong skill set in tracking how users were using apps, using data to
     segment users into different groups, and to predict their behavior.
            Video games were changing as well. Games weren’t just Mario and Zelda any-
     more. The things that people had learned about the motivational aspects of games
     were being applied in educational products since the 1980s, but the educational
     games industry had its ups and downs. But gamification was seeing a comeback
     through mobile apps. Gaming was once again coming to education in a big way.
            And educational technology was changing. Coursera, and several other pro-
     viders had launched recently, doing massively online courses. ABCMouse had be-
     come a hit success for educating young children. Education was moving beyond the
     textbook, beyond the print-sheet, and beyond the static website. Educational technol-
     ogy was embracing video and embracing interactivity.
            Age of Learning (the company that makes ABCMouse), was looking to do
     something new, and to use big data and video game design in an entirely new way.
     The three ingredients of education, video games, and big data were thrown into an
     oven and baked for several years, and a new product, called My Math Academy,
     would emerge.
                  Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation | 163



Lessons in Data Instrumentation
My Math Academy is a program designed to teach, practice, and assess basic math
skills for children between ages three and ten. It is composed of many small games,
each designed to teach, practice, or assess a particular skill. As they were building it,
the Age of Learning team knew that they wanted to do careful data instrumentation.
It was a key part of bringing big data, game design, and education together.
        This was because they knew about the potential value of having a large
data set. Researchers like Zoran Popović 5 and Ryan Baker had been successful in
capturing meaningful insights about children’s learning by analyzing data about
how they played video games and interacted with adaptive learning systems. (Read
more about Ryan Baker in Chapter 6.)
        There wasn’t really a big data set for children of this age with educational
data. There could be new insights about how people learn—for example, how often
do children confuse the number 3 with the similar looking number 8? Or how easy
is it to count if you can’t recognize numbers yet? They hoped they could apply the
insights they would gain to building a product where kids could not only enjoy their
experience but could also learn effectively and efficiently.
        Their first goal was to build a good, comprehensive data set for analysis. They
learned a lot of lessons along the way. They didn’t know exactly what they would be
looking for, so they opted to log with a lot of detail.
        Comprehensive logs were a challenge and a source of great debate. Some team
members wanted to log only what they thought they would need and would have a
clear use for. Others wanted to log every single event that happened, without any
plan for how to interpret the data.
        They settled on a plan, based on the ADAGE framework—an open API for
data collection in educational games. (See the inset on the next page for more de-
tails.) With ADAGE they would log down to a click level, and they would carefully
track all meaningful events in the game. They made sure to label things carefully, so
a human could read through the logs. They also tracked context, so an analyst could
easily figure out what else was going on, without doing a heroic parsing effort. In the
end, they got a little more data than they needed.
        The game designers’ and data team’s dialogue went something like this:
  Game designers:      Today we are going to ship a new game. Please help us
                       instrument the data.
        Data team:     Of course!
164 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



       Game designers:      Should we tell you what we want to know in advance, so you
                            can prepare accordingly?
             Data team:     No no, we will simply track everything. There is no need to
                            worry about it now!


     ADAGE FRAMEWORK. The Assessment Data Aggregator for Gaming
     Environments (or ADAGE) framework is a set of data collection and analysis
     tools on a shared, open source platform that uses big data techniques to trans-
     form clickstream data from game and design systems into formative feedback for
     usability testing and evidence of learning.6 The framework was designed to test
     whether click-stream data could provide reliable evidence of learning. ADAGE
     was used as a framework for video games in education research to demonstrate
     evidence of player learning. One goal of the framework and related research was
     to attend to the ways in which game play can provide a powerful new form of
     assessment. ADAGE consists of two main layers: (1) the semantic template that
     determines which click-stream data events could be indicators of learning; (2)
     the learning telemetry that captures data for analysis.7 The framework was used
     with and in popular game platforms and open source code repositories still exist.
     (See https://github.com/wids-eria/adage.)


             The data team settled on a strategy to track all the clicks within the games.
     They tracked to know if a child was clicking an important button or not. They tracked
     timestamps. They also tracked context, so they knew exactly what educational game
     the child was playing when the button was clicked.
             Things started well enough. A few days after they shipped, the game design-
     ers asked how many questions each student was getting right or wrong. They had
     the data. The logs had been appropriate, and it wasn’t hard to load the data into R (a
     data analytics tool set) to report the results.
             However, things soon turned. The next question was, “How long does it take
     to answer a question?” The answer was not in the logged data (because the students
     didn’t need to click when a question started). They couldn’t do the analysis without
     first reshipping the gaming and adding instrumentation.
             The data team learned a lesson: trying to track everything would track too
     much and not enough. The more questions you know in advance, the easier it is to
     track the right stuff. So, the data and design team began working together to try to
                    Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation | 165



figure out in advance what questions they might need from the data. And sometimes,
no matter how hard they tried, they just wouldn’t know until after they shipped.


LESSON: Instrumentation can be an iterative process.

      The team knew that analyzing poorly annotated logs was difficult, so they
chose to make the logs easy to interpret. The game designers wanted to know how
many games were passed successfully. They were trying to get a sense of if the
games were too easy or too hard.
  Game designers:       Can you tell us which games are easy and which are hard?
      Data analyst:     Sure, the data are all ready to go.

And so, the data analyst loaded the data into his computer. And he found all the
instances where the students had SUCCEEDED. And he added those all up and did
a very nice report.
      Data analyst:     Here is your report! I have counted all the SUCCEEDS.
  Game designers:       But where are the FAILS? Surely students SUCCEED and
                        FAIL, right?
      Data analyst:     No, they SUCCEED and CANCEL.

      The game designers were a little confused. “That does not sound right,” they
said. The analyst went back to his data. There were two columns. One was called
OUTCOME, and the other called SCORE. OUTCOME had two values, SUCCEED
and CANCEL. SCORE had two values, PASS and FAIL (and sometimes it was
empty too).

      Data analyst:     They should have called it COMPLETE and CANCEL,
                        instead of SUCCEED and CANCEL, and then I never would
                        have made that mistake.


LESSON: Language really matters, and it’s worth taking time to come up with
good data labels.


      The team knew that inconsistent logs were hard to work with, so they chose
to have clear rules for how to log data, and to have software that made those rules
166 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     easy to check and enforce. This was one of the hardest parts. Because the team was
     designing the game in an iterative way, they weren’t sure about all possible future
     features. They had to be careful with the naming conventions. This is a subtle art.

       Game designers:      We have invented a new game. It is beautiful and immersive
                            and educational. We should add data logs to it so we can
                            answer important questions and iterate on the design.
             Data team:     No problem. We’ll study this game more carefully and figure
                            out the best way to instrument the logging.
       Game designers:      It does resemble a multiple-choice question on an exam. You
                            could log it in a similar way!

     And so, the game designers left and the analysts played the game.

           Data analyst:    Before we discuss the instrumentation, let us order a pizza.

     The pizza was ordered.

           Data analyst:    It should arrive in thirty minutes. Now onto the business
                            at hand: I’ve played the game. The audio says, “pick the
                            number 3,” and it shows the student the numbers, 3, 4 and
                            5. The student must tap on the number 3. What shall we call
                            the number 3?
        Second analyst:     It is the correct answer!
       Another analyst:     No, it is the target choice.
       Another analyst:     No, it is the correct choice.
      First data analyst:   No, it is the target answer.
        Second analyst:     Or the chosen answer.

     And then the pizza arrived.

        Second analyst:     It’s been an hour and we have not named this simple thing?
                            This is taking much too long!
     Veteran data analyst: No, it’s taking about the right amount of time. I remember
                           when SUCCEED was confused with PASS. It’s worth
                           spending the time up front to get the language right. Let’s
                           make a decision, tell the developers, and keep our new word
                           and our common understanding of it long into the future.
                 Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation | 167



       This is an example where an existing standard or profile could have saved a
lot of time and provided labels that would be valuable across platforms within and
beyond the specific learning engineering team needs, not just across learning activi-
ties. And when a standard profile doesn’t exist it may be helpful to develop one with
others and publish it openly.
       In 2021 the ADL Initiative launched an xAPI Profile Server supporting
the open authoring, management, and publishing of xAPI profiles.8 xAPI profiles
provide a template for assembling sets of xAPI statements. These profiles model
the vocabulary, patterns, sequences, and concepts of learning activities within a
domain. Each xAPI profile is designed for a specific interaction type (for exam-
ple, video) or subject matter (for example, diagnostic medicine). While any given
learning activity could involve thousands of different data points about a learner’s
performance, an xAPI profile constrains what data are collected and in what for-
mats. This helps learning engineering teams to know what to collect, and it supports
interoperability—so that different systems use similar data collection schemas for
related learning experiences.


LESSON: Take time when choosing data labels, definitions and vocabulary. Use
standards when available; if standards don’t exist, help create new standards or
reusable profiles.


      The team knew that bad data are difficult to analyze, so they chose to invest
heavily in manual and automated quality assurance. They knew there were a lot
of people and layers involved in data instrumentation—from in the game, to in
the server, to the database, to the analyst. They made sure each layer had its own
documentation. Some months passed.
  Game designers:     Can you tell us if people are learning more, now that they
                      have played the game for several months?
      Data analyst:   Surely we have the data for this! We can do it.
   Veteran analyst:   (Now, a bit more “veteran.”) I don’t quite remember what is
                      a SUCCEED and what is a PASS.
      Data analyst:   I don’t really remember either, it’s been many months since
                      we thought about this. Let’s read through the code I wrote
                      several months ago and try to figure it out.
168 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     They read through the code, and eventually figured it out.

        Veteran analyst:    This same problem has come up twice. Let’s take the time to
                            write a data dictionary. It will define all the columns in our
                            tables, with all these little things that we figured out.
           Data analyst:    That’s great, it will also be much easier to share the data as
                            new people join the project.

           So, they created a data dictionary, where they documented each column, and
     the data inside. They used it many times in the future. There were a few good refer-
     ences they looked at for how to create good data dictionaries, including ceds.ed.gov.
     They also had the help of good software references, like metacat and metabase.


     LESSON: Maintain a data dictionary for your data definitions, aligned to standard
     definitions when available.


             The team knew that products change over time, as do technologies. They
     accepted that the data flow from an educational game, like water, flows down a
     stream. You can put some rocks here and there, but you can’t really control where it
     goes. And once the flow starts, you can’t really go back and change it, you just have
     to adapt. Using the data to change the app, and to help students learn, is the best part.
     After the game had shipped, the educators and data scientists and game designers
     all gathered.
       Game designers:      We built an educational game for three- to five-year-olds.
                            We have seen them play it. They love it, and they seem to be
                            learning.
              Educators:    Excellent! By the way, three- to five-year-olds, you say? A
                            three-year-old is very different than a four-year-old. That’s
                            30% of a life!
       Game designers:      Good point! Maybe we can look at each game and see the
                            pass rate based on the user’s age. If it’s very high or very
                            low, then maybe something isn’t right.

            And so, the data scientists took a look. Initially, they thought there wasn’t
     much of a difference between a three-year-old, a four-year-old, and a five-year-old.
     It’s the kind of thing that any teacher of children that age would say was obvious, but
                 Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation | 169



you might not know that if you were a mere game designer or programmer. When
they looked at the data, it was clear that users of a certain age would stay with the
game longer than other users. Four-year-olds would stay the longest, but younger or
older kids would drop off.
      They took a look at each game within the system and noticed that each game
had a particular age where the pass rate was around 75%. But it would be higher or
lower as you got further from the target age.
      Data analyst:   There does seem to be a correlation between cancellations,
                      pass rates, and age. Each game seems to have an optimal
                      age.
  Game designers:     Aha! Why don’t we show students their initial games
                      based on their age? Maybe people will have a better first
                      experience and will stick around longer.
        Educators:    Good idea!

      And so, it was done, and they saw that students stuck around longer!


LESSON: Data from good instrumentation gives visibility into opportunities for
improvement.



                                       !$"
Whether you or your team is using simple instrumentation, like data logged when
a learner submits a web form, or something more sophisticated, it always involves
some kind of sensor which may include a hardware interface (like a touch screen)
and software instrumentation. These sensor data then travel on a data pipeline and
are stored somewhere.
       Standards such as IMS Global’s Caliper, described in Figure 5.5, provide an
interoperable pipeline for collecting data captured from an online activity, such as
an activity launched from a learning management system using the Learning Tools
Interoperability (LTI) standard. IMS members include commercial learning man-
agement platform vendors that also provide analysis and data visualization software
features.
       IMS Global is a US-based 501(c)6 businesses association that facilitates stan-
dards development led by member-based work groups. IMS Global has testing
IMS GLOBAL CALIPER
Commercial learning management systems may use IMS Global’s Caliper
standard for instrumentation. It’s similar to xAPI in purpose and messaging
format but has a governed vocabulary and is engineered with a focus on cap-
ture and transport of analytics data tightly coupled with existing IMS teaching
and learning standards. Unlike xAPI, Caliper doesn’t specify a separate LRS
as part of the standard. In place of an LRS, IMS provides the Comprehensive
Learner Record Standard, a collection of discrete achievement assertions
(academic, co-curricular, and skills-based achievements) that can be issued
to the learner. The Caliper standard is built to complement existing IMS Glob-
al open standards and is well suited for use by organizations that use those
other IMS standards such as Common Cartridge, LTI, OneRoster and QTI.

Caliper includes a Sensor API for transmitting basic learning events in a sim-
ple and standardized format. Also, like xAPI, Caliper includes defined profiles
that model learning or supporting activities. As of April 2021, the IMS Global
website listed the following standard profiles which it also certifies for techni-
cal compliance:

Annotation Profile            Grading Profile                Session Profile
Assessment Profile            Library Profile                Survey Profile
Assignable Profile            Media Profile                  Tool Launch Profile
Basic Profile                 Reading Profile                Tool Use Profile
Feedback Profile              Resource Mgmt Profile
Forum Profile                 Search Profile

At the IMS Quarterly meeting, on August 15, 2016, IMS members and xAPI
developers determined that Caliper and xAPI are not equivalent, they have
di!erent origins, and there may be cases where one or the other is preferred,
as well as cases that support both or a translation of data from both. While
both xAPI (Actor/Verb/Object) and Caliper (Actor/Action/Activity) use a data
model based upon a triple statement structure, there are di!erences in the
detailed structure and usage of the Object and Activity definitions. However,
it should be possible for each specification to make use of the other’s Verb/
Action. The most significant di!erences noted in analysis are in the transport
layers for the specifications.

FIGURE 5.5. Caliper is the IMS Global Learning Consortium’s set of
standards for learning metrics. See www.imsglobal.org/activity/caliper
and www.imsglobal.org/initial-xapicaliper-comparison
                 Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation | 171



programs that enable products to be certified compliant with specific standards and
features of the standards. IMS conformance certification for Caliper Analytics is
available for Contributing and Affiliate-level members.
      IMS Global offers its member organizations a certification service for testing
applications that emit Caliper messages over HTTP. Each Metric Profile defined in
the Caliper Analytics specification serves as a separate unit of certification. Edtech
suppliers may certify their products for one, some, or all relevant Metric Profiles.9
For example, vendors that offer assessment products might certify a product as hav-
ing a compliant sensor API for the Caliper Assessment Profile designed to track at-
tempts, completion times, and item skips and responses as learners take assessments
and engage with individual assessment items. A learning management system ven-
dor would certify its platform as being compliant to receive those assessment event
messages from compliant sensor API.
      Chapter 13 has process tools for deciding what data to collect and for design-
ing instrumentation for the collection of those data. The chapter also includes refer-
ences to open-source software resources for instrumenting learning experiences.
    • Instrumentation includes “sensors” to collect data at the source and a
      “pipeline” to move, process, and store those data.
         – Sensors are hardware and software human-computer or
           environment-computer interfaces, like a touch screen on a phone
           and the software that handles the taps.
         – Sensors have limits.
         – Sensors may already exist or need to be developed.
         – Sensors may be obtrusive.
         – Sensor data may be perishable.
         – Raw data from sensors can collect events like taps and clicks but
           other things can be derived from those observations, such as a
           learner’s level of boredom or frustration.

    • The learning engineering process starts with the challenge. Knowing in
      advance what questions you want to answer with the data should guide
      what data to collect and review.

    • Iteration is needed throughout data collection, review, and analysis.

    • Domain-specific frameworks help establish repeatable approaches and
      practices.

    • Data standards provide an opportunity for interoperability and faster
      development of data pipelines. Experience API (xAPI) with its Learning
      Record Store (LRS) and Profile Server provide an infrastructure for
      instrumentation supported by IEEE. Caliper from IMS Global provides a
      standard for instrumentation that’s tightly integrated with other standards
      such as LTI, which is popular for launching activities from within a
      learning management system.

    • Maintain a data dictionary and use standard data definitions.

    • Engineering involves trade-o!s.




LEARNING ENGINEERING USES DATA (PART 1): INSTRUMENTATION

KEY POINTS
                    Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 1): Instrumentation | 173



Endnotes
1   Kitto, Kirsty, John Whitmer, Aaron Silvers, and Michael Webb. Creating data for learning
    analytics ecosystems. Beaumont, Alberta: Society for Learning Analytics Research (SoLAR),
    2020. www.solaresearch.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/SoLAR_Position-Paper_2020_09.pdf
2   “Fight Science: Ultimate Soldiers: A Well-Trained Sniper Uses Mind Over Matter to Control His
    Own Physiology.” Video, 4:45. National Geographic. January 25, 2010.
    https://youtu.be/yX2bVJm94b0
3   Henshaw, Todd. “After Action Review (AAR) Process: Nano Tools for Leaders.” Wharton@
    Work. Wharton Executive Education. April 2012. https://executiveeducation.wharton.upenn.edu/
    thought-leadership/wharton-at-work/2012/04/after-action-reviews
4   Altieri, Anthony. “Getting Started with xAPI: Four Lines of Code.” Learning Solutions Magazine.
    May 17, 2017. https://learningsolutionsmag.com/articles/2322/getting-started-with-xapi-four-
    lines-of-code
5   “Zoran Popović.” University of Washington, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science &
    Engineering. https://homes.cs.washington.edu/~zoran
6   “Wids-eria/ADAGE: Assessment Data Aggregator for Gaming Environments.” GitHub. Games +
    Learning + Society / Learning Games Network / Wisconsin Institute for Discovery UW Madison.
    Last modified September 23, 2015. https://github.com/wids-eria/ADAGE
7   Halverson, Richard, and V. Elizabeth Owen. “Game-Based Assessment: An Integrated Model for
    Capturing Evidence of Learning in Play.” International Journal of Learning Technology 9, no. 2
    (2014): 111–138. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJLT.2014.064489
8   “xAPI Profile Server to Launch in 2021.” ADL Initiative, US Department of Defense. December
    2, 2020. https://adlnet.gov/news/2020/12/02/xAPI-Profile-Server-to-Launch-in-2021
9   “Caliper Analytics.” IMS Global Learning Consortium. Updated August 2021.
    www.imsglobal.org/activity/caliper
CHAPTER 6


Learning Engineering Uses
Data (Part 2): Analytics
by Michelle!Barrett, Erin!Czerwinski, Jim!Goodell, Daniel!Jacobs,
Steve!Ritter, Robert!Sottilare, and Khanh-Phuong!Thai



./+012134/1321//02134254+4607-/554+18460+-92-/49:+94+66;2/54
9:/4;/+0121345-2/1-/54<52134:<=+1>-/19/0/84/1321//02134
8/52314=/9:787;732/54+184data-informed decision-
making49745<667094;/+01/054+1849:/2048/?/;76=/19@



This chapter is a high-level introduction to data analysis for decision-making within
the learning engineering process. It addresses the use of data for feedback to the
learner and people supporting learners, and it addresses the use of data to inform
iterative improvements to engineered solutions. It gives some high-level guidance to
non-statisticians as to how to think about data.

Learning engineers use data to measure the effect of conditions on learning within
a rapid cycle for improvement. This involves understanding the data from the in-
strumented learning (including the context around learning experiences) and how to
determine whether the quality of the measure is sufficient for the decision at hand.
Analytics—the systematic computational analysis of data—is central to the investi-
gation phase of the learning engineering process introduced in Chapter 1.
      Data-informed design decisions are needed because human intuitions about
what helps people learn are often wrong. Looking at data from simple trials can
keep the work focused on the most important design features and avoid costly di-
versions. For example, when Ken Koedinger’s team at Carnegie Mellon University
was developing a cognitive tutor (an intelligent tutoring system) for Geometry, they
wondered if they should build in a diagramming tool. In a lot of problems presented


DOI: 10.4324/9781003276579-10
176 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     to students, the system showed a diagram, and Koedinger was wondering, “maybe
     that’s an important part of figuring out how to solve a geometry problem—to be able
     to draw the diagram.” But before they invested in developing diagramming soft-
     ware, they did a study: “In some we gave the diagram, in some we didn’t, in some we
     didn’t give it but prompted them to draw it [on paper],” he said. “There was almost
     no difference at all, and we did that before we built the diagramming tool fortunately.
     And we decided not to build it because it wasn’t the root cause of difficulty.”


                                              !!"
     Would you think that you could do better on a test by studying less with cheaper
     instructional materials? That’s exactly what one learning engineering team found.
            At Kaplan Inc., Bror Saxberg was chief learning officer, overseeing the re-
     search and development of innovative learning strategies and consistent academic
     standards for Kaplan University courses and Kaplan products. Like Ken Koeding-
     er at Carnegie Mellon University, Bror and his team recognized that if there were
     questions that the current science didn’t answer, his team would need to do their
     own experiments. Although they looked to outside research to inform interventions
     and course design, they recognized that they lacked evidence about what worked
     for their specific student population and delivery model. So they created a research
     pipeline to test the impact of interventions on student learning and implement the
     best approaches at scale. “The Pipeline was conceived of in 2013 by Bror Saxberg
     and David Niemi, Vice President of Measurement and Evaluation for Kaplan, Inc.,
     along with colleagues who saw a need for Kaplan University to accumulate credi-
     ble evidence about what worked to measurably improve learning and outcomes for
     adult, online students.” 1 Some of the research had surprising results.
            Within Kaplan is the Kaplan Test Preparation group. This group is one of the
     leaders in preparing students for the Law School Admission Test (LSAT). Saxberg
     explains that about 25 percent of this test includes “challenging logical reasoning
     problems with complex question stems and distractors.” 2 The Kaplan Test Prepara-
     tion group knew that these problems weren’t only a significant portion of the test but
     also very difficult to master. Their idea, which seemed like an obvious one, was to
     use video to prepare students for these test items. The video they produced included
     embedded practice questions for students to answer and typically took more than an
     hour for students to complete. A workbook also was provided as a part of the video
     test preparation.
            It seemed a solution to the problem was found, but there was also an alternative.
                          Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 2): Analytics | 177



A Kaplan Test Preparation learning engineer considered that the logical reasoning
portion of the test was very complex and was likely to “overload the working mem-
ory of most learners.” 3 (See Chapter 2 for an explanation of cognitive load theory.)
This engineer believed that a video was not the best way for students to get a grasp
on these logic problems. Instead, he proposed students study worked examples,
which are examples of the logical reasoning problems found on the test worked out
and supplemented with expert commentary.4
       The worked examples were designed to limit split attention by aligning each
statement in the question to its explanation, allowing students to focus on one thing
at a time. It offered expert thinking for each part of the question and reduced the
explanation to the minimum required to understand the logic.
       At this point, two methods had been developed for helping students prepare
for the logical reasoning part of the test. To find out which method was more ef-
fective, Kaplan conducted a study. There were four different conditions students
were put in before taking a twelve-question post-test (see Figure 6.1). One group of
students prepared using the videos and workbook for an average preparation time of
about ninety minutes. Another group studied eight worked examples for an average
time of about nine minutes. Another group studied fifteen worked examples for an
average time of about fifteen minutes, and the control group didn’t prepare at all for
the post-test. An example of the worked examples is shown in Figure 6.2.


        EXPERIMENTAL CONDITION               AVERAGE TIME SPENT
        Test only (Control)                  0 minutes (no test preparation)
        Videos and workbook                  90 minutes
        15 worked examples                   15 minutes
        8 worked examples                    9 minutes

       FIGURE 6.1. Experimental conditions in the Kaplan LSAT study

       The study found that the two worked example conditions “worked statistically
significantly better at helping learners master” the logical reasoning problems.
Additionally, it was found that the video and workbook students didn’t do much
better than the students who didn’t prepare at all for the test. Perhaps most surprising
of all was that the group that did the best was the eight-question worked examples
group—the students who only studied for about nine minutes. That group did better
than even the group that took more time to study more worked examples.5 Figure 6.3
shows the study results.
178 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     WORKED EXAMPLE
      QUESTION                                              EXPERT THINKING
      Linguist: Most people can tell whether a              The underlying principle here is:
      sequence of words in their own dialect is             People can apply sophisticated
      grammatical. Yet few people who can do so             rules without being able to
      can specify the relevant grammatical rules.           specify those rules.
      Which one of the following best illustrates the
      principle underlying the linguist’s statements?
      (A) Some people can write cogent and                  Nothing here is about rules
      accurate narrative descriptions of events.            or applying rules.
      But these people are not necessarily
      also capable of composing emotionally
      moving and satisfying poems.
      (B) Engineers who apply the principles of             Making a distinction about people
      physics to design buildings and bridges               that can apply rules and di!erent
      must know a great deal more than do the               people who discover the rules.
      physicists who discover these principles.
      (C) Some people can tell whether any                  Correct. This is saying some
      given piece of music is a waltz. But the              people can apply the rules
      majority of these people cannot state                 (defining characteristics) for
      the defining characteristics of a waltz.              identifying a waltz without knowing
                                                            specifically what those rules are.
      (D) Those travelers who most enjoy                    The second part of this sounds
      their journeys are not always those                   a bit like the second part of the
      most capable of vividly describing                    linguist’s underlying principle
      the details of those journeys.                        (describing details) but it is not
                                                            describing rules. And the first part
                                                            is not about applying any rules, it
                                                            is just about enjoying something.
      (E) Quite a few people know the rules                 This one is almost the opposite of
      of chess, but only a small number of                  the linguist’s principle, people who
      them can play chess very well.                        know the rules but can’t apply them.

     FIGURE 6.2. An example for LSAT reasoning like the ones tested by the Kaplan
     team. The question is on the left, and expert reasoning is on the right.
     Adapted from Khan Academy, www.khanacademy.org/test-prep/lsat/lsat-lessons


            The takeaway from this example isn’t that worked examples are the solution to
     every learning problem or that studying less is better for learning. The takeaway is
     that the best solution in this case was one that took into consideration that students
     were working with complex problems that would overload working memory. The
     team developed a theory based on recent research about worked examples, designed
                             Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 2): Analytics | 179


                                       Average Study Time (minutes)         Average Post-test Score




                 Test Only                                   42.25


                                                                                                92.66
Existing Video Instruction
                                                          39.42


                                        15.36
    15 Worked Examples
                                                                  48.67


                                    9.00
     8 Worked Examples
                                                                      53


                              0            20           40             60           80                100


  FIGURE 6.3. Kaplan study results: fewer worked examples outperformed longer videos



  an alternative preparation method, tested it in context, and let the data decide the
  best option. The solution in this case likely can’t be applied to other cases; learning
  engineering research isn’t about discovering generalizable learning science findings.
  Learning engineering research deals with highly contextualized cases within spe-
  cific courses or products for specific learner populations. This research then can be
  applied to these specific cases to improve learning outcomes.


                                            !""
  Data Analysis is a Team Sport: Making Sense of Data
  The challenge for learning engineering is to improve learning or learning condi-
  tions. Data analysis and analytics help us to answer whether our creation effectively
  improved learning or learning conditions. The findings also typically pique curiosi-
  ty, generating additional questions for exploration.
         Edmentum is a company that provides research-based curriculum, assess-
  ments for learning, and educational services for K-12 educators and learners. The
  roots of the company trace back to the early 1960s and the University of Illinois
  at Urbana-Champaign under the name PLATO. The company created what many
180 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



                                      experts would agree was the first computer-assisted
                                      instructional system designed for widespread use.6
  PSYC HOME TRICS IS THE              Today, Edmentum serves millions of teachers and
                                      students and employs an active learning engineering
 SCIENCE OF MEASURING
                                      practice to evaluate the contributions of product
 MENTAL CAPA CITIE S AND              features, instructional curriculum and content, and
        PROC ESSE S                   implementation practices to learning outcomes.
                                      Edmentum’s learning engineering processes include
                                      roles across the organization, such as learning engi-
                                      neers, psychometricians, learning designers, content
                                      and assessment developers, implementation consul-
                                      tants, user interface and user experience (UI / UX)
    designers, data scientists, software engineers, and product managers.
           Roles in any particular learning engineering team or at any other organization
    may be defined differently even if the same titles are used. Edmentum’s learning
    designers are experts in pedagogy, instructional design, and the specific content
    being taught. Edmentum’s research data engineers manage the data pipeline and
    conduct ETL (extract, transform, load) processes that make raw data usable for
    research purposes. This role includes capturing feedback data and supporting ex-
    periments; they also have the technical expertise to help with instrumentation and
    sensors. Finally, Edmentum’s learning engineers bring expertise in experimental
    design and learning sciences, particularly within the context of online and adaptive
    instructional systems. They also have strong technical data skills. In some ways,
    their roles are akin to UX researchers—but with a focus on what learners are doing
    in a system to achieve learning outcomes (which Edmentum’s psychometricians
    help measure). These learning engineers test hypotheses with data analyses and plan
    follow-up experiments to test additional hypotheses where needed. When it comes
    time to examine data analyses and decide on next steps, each of these roles has an
    important contribution to make.
           Why so many different areas of expertise? While organizations may not use
    the same titles or organizational structure as Edmentum, interpreting analytic re-
    sults requires consideration of a large variety of facets. Let’s look at a simple exam-
    ple from Edmentum’s archives.


     SCENARIO
     Here’s the situation: The results from a formative assessment delivered immediately
                         Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 2): Analytics | 181



following online instruction are yielding a poor pass rate. In other words, students
who are asked to demonstrate knowledge on a topic—on which they have just re-
ceived instruction—aren’t able to do so according to the measure provided to them.
What’s more, the pass rate is no better than the scores on the pre-test. This is a
basic descriptive analysis, simply calculating the percent of students who pass the
formative assessment. Yet the interpretation of those results benefits from different
perspectives with far more effective resulting actions. For this simple example, a few
roles are critical to the discussion:

      Learning engineer: What are the potential causes of this result? Who
      should be consulted and what additional analyses should we pursue? What
      actions should we take as a result of this finding?

      Learning designer: Is there evidence that the instruction could lead to
      confusion or doesn’t address a common misconception? Is the skill being
      taught chunked properly? Are there elements of instruction that may be
      distracting or unintentionally increase cognitive load? Are there other
      pedagogical approaches for this instruction that may be more successful?

      Content and assessment developers: Is the instructional content and the
      assessment content aligned so that the construct taught is the construct
      measured? Are there errors in the instructional or assessment content? Are
      the pre-test and post-test measuring the same construct?

      Psychometrician: Is the passing score set properly to distinguish between
      students who have mastered the content versus students who haven’t? Is
      there evidence any of the assessment content has multiple correct responses,
      a highly attractive distractor that may indicate a mis-key, a scoring issue
      that isn’t correctly assigning credit to a correct response? Is there evidence
      of construct-irrelevant variance, for example, linguistic complexity
      incommensurate with a learner’s profile, accommodations not being assigned
      for students who require them? Is there evidence students are speeding
      through the assessment, answering at random, or are otherwise disengaged?
      Are the pre-test and the post-test at the same level of difficulty?

      Implementation consultant: Is there evidence teachers may be
      implementing the system in an unintended way, for example having the
      students take the assessment prior to instruction? Is this context, setting, or
      group of students unusual?
182 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



           Software engineer: Is there an error in our calculation of a pass? In our
           attribution of formative assessment items to the skill?

           UI / UX designer: Is there evidence of construct-irrelevant variance,
           for example, the submit button located in an unusual place? Do we need
           to include additional ways for students to engage in the instructional or
           assessment content, for example, universal design for learning.


            As you can see, a very simple analysis can result in alternative hypotheses
     and possible investigations. If the focus of interpretation is too narrow, it is highly
     possible that an impactful revision is missed. In the scenario above, Edmentum took
     multiple actions, including internal process revisions to better target and align in-
     structional and assessment content based on evidence-centered design principles, a
     UI update, and correction of mis-keyed assessment items. In addition, regular moni-
     toring processes were established to allow for ongoing and continuous improvement.
            As the analyses become more sophisticated, moving from descriptive to
     predictive and prescriptive analytics, it may become challenging for all participants
     to understand and interpret the analyses performed. However, the importance of
     bringing together a team for this interpretation isn’t diminished and may even be
     more critical as the methods themselves (for example, deep learning) can yield less
     immediate transparency. Therefore, those engaging in generating the analytics
     should invest in simple and clear communication of methods and results such that all
     relevant roles can join the party.


                                             !#"
     Learning Analytics
     For some kinds of learning, one-on-one tutoring works a lot better than group in-
     struction. In 1984, Benjamin Bloom and his students found that learners tutored
     using a certain approach performed so much better that a student likely to get a ‘D’
     based on classroom instruction might get an ‘A’ if tutored.
            Great human tutors and teachers are “mind readers,” able to infer in real time
     what a student is feeling (frustrated, board, engaged) based on close observation of
     posture and facial expressions. And by close observation, and through deep under-
     standing of how people learn the topic at hand, they can infer what the learner might
     be thinking when faced with a problem. They can infer misconceptions or missed
                         Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 2): Analytics | 183



steps in the process by closely observing actions, reactions, and answers given.
       The approach that Benjamin Bloom found was so successful with tutoring is
called mastery learning. With mastery learning, the student must master the cur-
rent learning objective before moving on to the next one. Bloom’s dilemma was that
the model of one-on-one human tutoring with mastery learning was too costly to
implement at scale. Learning analytics may help solve that problem.
       One thing that makes a difference in one-on-one tutoring versus group
instruction is the amount of data available to the human tutor. A tutor can more
closely observe one learner at a time. The classroom teacher must take in information
about many students simultaneously. The better that a tutor can “read the mind” of
students, the better feedback they can provide to guide the learner toward mastery.
       Ryan Baker, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania, studies how data
from online interactions can better be used to improve learning. Most of his research
is with intelligent tutoring systems, but any learning experience will do if properly
instrumented.
       Ryan is the founder of the field of education data mining and a superstar in the
field of learning analytics. His advice is to “have a data analyst [on your team] who
knows something about education.” He said the current data analysis tools make it
easy to make a lot of mistakes and not understanding the context also leads to wrong
conclusions.
       Baker and his colleagues have figured out ways of using the kinds of data
collected by tutoring systems like Duolingo and Khan Academy’s practice exercises
to gain real-time insights similar to those that human tutors have. This is possible
without actually watching the learner. It can be done in some cases just using data
from students’ interactions with a touch screen or keyboard.
       There’s value in human tutoring that can’t be replaced by a machine, but by
using data from instrumented learning experiences, tutoring systems combined
with human teachers / tutors are moving closer to the kinds of results that Benjamin
Bloom observed with one-on-one human tutors. Data instrumentation and analytics
can collect the data and provide feedback to learners directly or augment a teacher’s
ability to notice when a student needs a certain kind of feedback.
       Real-time analytics used from instrumented classrooms (for example, using
video) can be used to signal to an instructor when a student is bored or frustrated.
It augments the human capability of the instructor to process data on many students
in the classroom.
       Over a decade ago, Ryan (among others) discovered ways of using trans-
action logs to detect when students were gaming the system in online intelligent
184 | Learning Engineering Toolkit
    BIG DATA LEARNING ANALYTICS
    Big data are extremely large data sets that may be analyzed computationally to reveal
    patterns, trends, and associations, especially relating to human behavior and inter-
    actions.* Data from instrumented learning experiences have created unprecedented
    opportunities for analytics to find patterns, predict outcomes, and gain insights for
    optimizing learning. For example, a set of techniques called knowledge tracing is
    used to model each learner’s mastery of concepts or skills based on data collected
    from engagement with a sequence of learning activities. Knowledge tracing data can
    help provide learners with personalized feedback and can help learning engineers
    discover imperfections in learning experiences and opportunities for improvement.
           When looking for patterns in big data, the raw data may have millions of
    transactions from thousands of learners and many variables. This may be too big
    to process efficiently. Big data analytics uses big data reduction methods to find
    patterns or features in the data most relevant to the previously identified challenge.
    For example, dimensional reduction reduces the number of variables by eliminating
    irrelevant properties or combining attributes into fewer variables. For example, analysis
    that involves location data with both city and zip code could reduce the size of the
    data set by eliminating one or both if the analysis is not concerned with location. In
    other cases, variables highly correlated can be combined, data with missing values
    eliminated, or features are extracted from a source data set into a derived data set for
    further analysis.
           Machine learning is an application of artificial intelligence that provides systems
    the ability to automatically learn using algorithms and statistical models to analyze and
    draw inferences from patterns in data. In machine learning, data-driven predictions
    or decisions are based on a training data set used to develop the model, then a
    validation data set is used to tune the model and know when the model has had the
    right amount of training, finally a test data set is used to evaluate the final model.
           For big problems that cannot be easily solved by one team, artificial intelligence
    engineers issue a global challenge called a shared task. The development of Natural
    Language Processing—the technology used by Alexa, Siri, and Cortana—advanced
    much more rapidly than it would have otherwise because of shared tasks. It is often
    about getting the right data into the hands of the people who can, and are interested
    in, solving a problem.
           In learning engineering, the research team at Duolingo used a shared task to
    find out which learning algorithms could best predict what mistakes each learner will
    make in the future.† Anonymized lesson histories from millions of Duolingo learners
    made the research possible. In another shared task, participants started with English
    prompts and generated sets of plausible translations in five other languages. For
    evaluation, Duolingo provided sentences with handcrafted, field-tested sets of possible
    translations, weighted and ranked according to actual learner response frequency.
    These machine learning shared tasks helped advance the field overall while solving a
    specific challenge in Duolingo’s learning engineering process of iterative improvement.



  * “big data, n.1.” OED Online. Oxford University Press, December 2020. Web. Retrieved Jan. 2021.
  † https://venturebeat.com/2020/08/18/how-duolingo-uses-ai-in-every-part-of-its-app. Retrieved Jan. 2021.
                          Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 2): Analytics | 185



tutors, such as when they were doing practice
problems. Just like students might ask a human
                                                                D IG   INTO BIG DATA
tutor for help when they get stuck on a problem,
they could ask the tutor for a hint. Within each                   AN D LE AR NING
                                                                                      YAN’S
problem, the tutor has a set of available hints                ANALY TIC S AT R
                                                                                        DATA
that increasingly get closer to revealing the                  F RE E MOOC: BIG
answer. Sometimes rather than putting in the                         IN E DUC ATION
effort to practice, students gamed the system by
asking for hint after hint until the answer was
given. Ryan and his colleagues used analysis of
transaction log data to determine when asking
for a hint is productive for learning and when
it’s counterproductive. Further research has examined what kinds of feedback helps
bring about productive learner behaviors, and Ryan has also investigated interven-
tions to help nudge learners away from gaming and other unproductive behaviors
toward more productive learning behaviors.
        In 2006, Ryan learned a hard lesson, that quantitative analysis doesn’t tell the
whole story. The intervention was a puppy character, Scooter the Tutor, displayed
on the screen. “If kids use the software properly then Scooter would look happy, and
he danced around. If they misused the software Scooter, looked sadder and sadder.
Eventually if students had failed to learn and continued to game the system, Scooter
would give them supplementary exercises that were different in kind but covered the
same stuff they bypassed.”
        The idea was that it would reduce the incentive to game because there’d be
a direct penalty for gaming. “So, we deployed it, and lo and behold it worked! The
data showed that students gamed the system about half as much. And when students
didn’t game the system, they learned significantly more. Rather than falling further
behind, which is what we’d seen in previous studies, they actually caught up to the
students who hadn’t gamed.”
        This looked like a big victory. Ryan documented the positive findings from his
experiments in his doctoral dissertation and in journal articles.7 But the data didn’t
tell the full story. For a solution to scale, people need to use it. In this case, it turned
out, teachers and students didn’t like Scooter. And that was a surprise. “The school
system that we’d been working with didn’t want to use it because the teachers didn’t
like it. And so we dug a little deeper. We actually asked, ‘how did you like it,’ ‘how
did it affect your learning,’ ‘what did you think about it?’”
        By surveying students and teachers, the additional qualitative data revealed
186 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     unfortunate truths about the scalability of the solution.
           • “Students who never gamed, who only saw the happy dancing dog, said
             they liked it; they said it helped their learning, despite the fact that it
             didn’t.”
           • Students who gamed the system, who the data showed benefited by the
             intervention, said they didn’t like Scooter and that Scooter hurt their
             learning. “Now do I think they actually thought it hurt their learning?
             No. I think they didn’t like it, but they were willing to tell us (and they
             probably told their teacher) that they thought it hurt their learning.”

           This speaks to the importance of human-centered design (as discussed in
     Chapter 3). The other thing Ryan and his team learned was that Scooter promoted
     bad behavior. “Scooter got really angry and caught fire. It wasn’t meant to look like
     catching fire. It was meant to look like anger lines, but it looked like catching fire.
     And some of the middle school boys came up with this game that they played where
     they tried to see who could get Scooter to catch fire first.”




     You know how to use the tutor right!          Why do we need to know the
                                                   largest value of height
                                                   in this part of the problem?


                                                   To help pick a scale for the axis
                                                   To help pick the last label of the axis
                                                   To help pick the first label of the axis
                                                   To help pick which point to plot first
     Work carefully, so you can learn.

     FIGURE 6.4. Scooter the Tutor—looking happy when the student hasn’t been
     gaming harmfully (top-left), giving a supplementary exercise to a gaming
     student (right), and looking angry (unintentionally looking on fire) when the
     student is believed to have been gaming the system (bottom-left)
                         Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 2): Analytics | 187



       This is an example of data from an experiment showing that an intervention
can be effective in the context of a small-scale experiment, but it can fail to scale due
to contextual factors outside of the cognitive science. “It failed because we didn’t
consider the other dimensions of our solution and its adoption,” Ryan told us.
       There’s an interesting postscript to this story, however, that emphasizes the
importance of context. A key concept in the learning engineering process described
in Chapters 1 and 2 is that learners are contextually situated. Part of that context is
the culture of the school, organization, or community. After Ryan’s initial develop-
ment of Scooter the Tutor, researchers in other countries used translated versions of
Scooter to run studies themselves. “In some countries, they liked Scooter and found
him helpful. In some countries, the students never really got any interventions be-
cause everyone would go off and talk about the answer before they would even type
it into Scooter. It was really fascinating—the diversity of ways that students in dif-
ferent countries respond to the same agent. That’s another really interesting learning
engineering challenge; we can’t just assume that we build something once, in one
context, and forever that’s how it’s going to be.”

Data standards make it easier to create, share, and integrate data. They provide
data integrity, accuracy, and consistency, clarify ambiguous meanings, minimize
redundant data, and the means to document intended use and rules. To share, ex-
change, and understand data, we must standardize the format as well as the mean-
ing.8 See Chapter 14, Software and Technology Standards as Tools.




                                         !#"
As a cognitive scientist at Carnegie Learning, Martina Pavelko was used to thinking
deeply about the particular ways that students learn to solve math problems. The
compendium of strategies, misconceptions, skills and feedback used to guide stu-
dents through this process is part of the cognitive model that drives instruction in the
MATHia intelligent tutoring system.
       But now Martina was asked to look at this process from a different perspec-
tive. Carnegie Learning was going to try to simplify the process of creating these
cognitive models in order to make them more accessible to new cognitive scientists,
and to enable cognitive scientists focused on topics other than mathematics to create
new content. Martina needed to introspect into her own process—and those of other
188 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     cognitive scientists—to accomplish this task.
             Martina had also earned a masters’ degree in applied learning science, and
     she’d previously worked as a chemistry teacher. She brought the precision of a chem-
     ist to the task, and her academic preparation and years of teaching gave her the
     instinct to know what would work with students and be acceptable in the classroom.
             Authoring tools used to create instructional content make assumptions about
     roles and responsibilities in the authoring process, and one particular challenge was
     deciding where to draw the line between writing the cognitive model (the general
     AI system that can guide students through solving math problems) and writing the
     content (the specific math problems that students will need to solve). Consider a par-
     ticular word problem that a student could be asked to solve. Mathematical thinking
     and content are related; the story expressed in a word problem might lead to different
     misconceptions or strategic approaches than another, but writing a word problem re-
     quires a very different skill set than writing a cognitive model. A good word problem
     is written clearly and at an appropriate level for students, expresses a story that is
     interesting to students, and requires students to apply the appropriate mathematics.

     A cognitive model is a descriptive or computational representation of human
     thinking about a given concept, skill, or domain for the purposes of comprehension
     and prediction. A cognitive model of learning, is an account of how humans gain
     accurate and complete knowledge.9


            Martina quickly recognized that a key set of decisions for the new tool revolved
     around the relationship between cognitive model authoring and content authoring. In
     discussion with other cognitive scientists and engineers, she was asked what seemed
     to be a simple question: How many word problems do you need?
             Martina’s immediate answer was that standard practice was to write 200
     problems for each topic. No student would ever do all 200, but this database of
     problems seemed to be enough to cover the different skills that students would need
     to learn within the domain of mathematics as well as to provide enough variety in the
     problem set that students sitting next to each other would not get the same problem.
             Following standard practice was not a satisfying answer, and initial
     discussions with others focused on questions that reflected a mathematical approach
     to the problem: what’s the probability that two students sitting together will be
     working on the same problem? How many problems per skill do we need and how
     does this question change for skills that tend to co-occur? MATHia’s algorithm for
                         Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 2): Analytics | 189



picking problems for individual students is complex; it considers the student’s past
history, strengths, weaknesses and other factors, and characterizing the problem
mathematically seemed difficult. Since they were focused on authoring tools for
creating new content, it did not initially occur to them that existing data might help
them understand this problem. Instead of focusing on new content, they decided
to first understand better how their existing content was being used. Were there
mathematics topics that needed fewer than 200 problems? Were there ones that
needed more? More importantly, what factors influenced not only the number of
problems needed but the variety?
       Carnegie Learning hosts a biweekly data jam, a meeting where representatives
of different departments—including Cognitive Science, Research, Engineering,
Product Management and Marketing—get together to talk about difficult issues related
to understanding or collecting data. At Carnegie Learning, data analytics is a team
sport. Martina, along with Hao Li, a learning engineer in the research department,
took the problem to the data jam. The meeting led to a different perspective on the
problem. Instead of thinking about how many problems a topic needed, they started
talking about problem use. The right number of problems (and the right distribution
of problem types) should, ideally, lead to a situation where every problem is used
equally often. Problems that address difficult skills, where students might need to
complete ten problems to reach mastery need to be more frequent than problems that
address easier skills, where students might need only three or four to reach mastery.
By examining existing content, they discovered many cases where the problem bank
was less than optimal. In several cases, there were some problems that were rarely
used while others were used for almost every student.

Instead of focusing on new content, they decided to first understand better how
their existing content was being used.


       This project started with a focus on authoring tools for new content and did
not initially focus on analytics on existing data, but the emphasis on data changed
the project and the authoring process substantially. They moved toward a system
where, instead of trying to author the complete problem bank up front, they author a
minimal set of problems based on their assumptions about skill difficulty and other
factors. When the system is delivered, they monitor the distribution of problem
presentations to determine whether there are gaps in the problem bank that need to
be filled.
190 | Learning Engineering Toolkit




                                              !$"
     In Chapter 4 we examined techniques used across fields of engineering. One of those
     techniques is building models. In creating tutoring systems, data are used to model
     things about the learner cognitive states such as the ability to recall some knowl-
     edge or do some skill. Models are also used to predict a learner’s affective state or
     behaviors under given conditions. And models are used to predict how well a given
     learning activity will bring about a given learning outcome for a group of learners
     or an individual.
            A big part of learning analytics applied to intelligent tutoring systems has to do
     with creating, testing, and tuning predictive or descriptive models. Remember when
     Bror Saxberg and the team at Kaplan found that studying eight worked examples
     was more effective than studying fifteen worked examples? They also found that
     fifteen worked examples were better than, for example, zero worked examples.
            What if we want to predict the optimum number of worked examples? Figure
     6.5 shows the three data points from which we can build a simple predictive model.
     With just three data points and reported margins of error in the data from the original
     study we will not be able to get an accurate prediction, but we can use those three
     points to illustrate the concept of predictive modeling.


                    WORKED EXAMPLES                    POST-TEST SCORE
                               0                              42.25
                               8                                53
                              15                              48.67

                 FIGURE 6.5. Data points from the Kaplan study


            One way we can build a predictive model is to fit a curve onto the three points
     we have. The following analysis illustrates the concept of fitting known data points
     to a curve (a parabola). Remember the quadratic formula !" #" $% &" '" (%" '" ) ? We
     have three points that we can plug into three equations, and each equation has three
     unknown variables: a, b, and c. The quadratic function tool at mathepower.com can
     help us develop this model for the number of worked examples. And, interestingly,
     it also gives a worked example showing how to calculate the parabola formula from
                                Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 2): Analytics | 191



                                                  MAXIMUM
                                               TURNING POINTS
                                                                                  Here’s the curve fit to
You are looking for a quadratic             AT (9.122 , 53.1
                                                              51)                   the three points
function with points at:
  • ! " #$%& " '()(*
  • ! " +$%& " *,
  • ! " #$%&' " ()*+,
                                               Y-AXIS INTE
Mathepower found the                                       RCEPT
                                               AT (0, 42
following function: &                                    .25)
f -!.&"&/0*#1#&!2&&3&2*14&!&3&(2*2$


 Here’s a worked example
                                                                                       ROOTS AT
                                                                                               -11.021
 showing how Mathepower
                                                                                          AND 29
                                                                                                .265
 calculated the function for
          the curve

                                                      f -!.&"&5! 2 &3&6!&3&#7
THESE INPUTS                           GIVE THESE EQUATIONS              AND SIMPLIFY TO THIS SET
Point (0, 42.25) is f -0.&"&(2*2$&     053063#7&"&(2*2$&                 7&"&(2*2$&
Point (8, 53) is f -).&"&$1&           #58) 2&3&#68)&3&#7&"&$1&          +(5&3&)6&3&7&"&$1
Point (15, 48.67) is f -#$.&"&()*+,&   #58#$ 2&3&#68#$&3&#7&"&()*+,&     22$5&3&#$6&3&7&"&()*+,&

THIS IS A SYSTEM OF 3 EQUATIONS WITH 3 VARIABLES,
SO USING THEM TOGETHER, WE CAN SOLVE FOR A, B, AND C

         225 divided by 64 = 3.516, so LINE-3                                     7&"&(2*2$    LINE-1
       was multiplied by -3.516 times LINE-2 to                        +(5& 3& )6& 3& 7&"&$1   LINE-2
                               a
            cancel out the variable in LINE-3            &/#1*#2$6& 3& &/2*$#+7&"&/#1,*+$)     LINE-3

                                                                                  7&"&(2*2$    LINE-1
                                       a
                         To isolate the variable,            5& 3& 0*#2$6& 3& 0*0#+7&"&0*)2)   LINE-2
                        LINE-2 was divided by 64         &/#1*#2$6& 3& &/2*$#+7&"&/#1,*+$)     LINE-3

                                                                                  7&"&(2*2$    LINE-1
                                       b
                       To isolate the variable,              5& 3& 0*#2$6& 3& 0*0#+7&"&0*)2)   LINE-2
                  LINE-3 was divided by -13.125                     &6& 3& &/0*#427&"&#0*())   LINE-3


SUBSTITUTING THE KNOWN VARIABLES ACROSS EQUATIONS GETS: 5&"&0*#1#&&&6&"&2*14&&&7&"&(2*2$

INSERTING THOSE VALUES SHOWS THAT THE FUNCTION EQUALS: & -!.&"&/0*#1#!2&3&2*14!&3&(2*2$
                                                                        f

FIGURE 6.6. Data points from Kaplan study plugged into the quadratic
function tool at mathepower.com
192 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     the three points! * Figure 6.6 shows the mathepower.com outcome.
            The solved function serves as a model predicting that the optimum number of
     worked examples is about nine (9.122 to be more precise). We can see an estimate of
     that by looking at the peak of the graph. We can also predict the scores of students
     that study more or less worked examples by plugging the number into the formula or
     looking at the graph. What might someone score if they studied five worked exam-
     ples? What about twenty?
            But this is just a model, and models are not perfect. Testing the model with
     additional real data from learners’ interactions is an important next step. With new
     insights from testing, we can iteratively refine the model. It would be expensive to
     test every possible option but data from testing even one or two additional conditions
     could give additional insights into the accuracy of the model.
            We can also add parameters to the model to make it more precise and then test
     again, such as the time spent studying each worked example. We can A/B test var-
     ious worked example features. With test data we can find outliers, such as learners
     who don’t do as well with nine worked examples. And from that, we can iteratively
     test alternative activity designs or other conditions that might work better for those
     learners.
            With machine learning, a kind of artificial intelligence, a predictive model
     may be trained using existing data that reflect the kind of variables. Chapter 18,
     Data Analysis Tools describes other kinds of predictive and descriptive models used
     in learning analytics and education data mining and techniques used to test those
     models.


                                               !%"
     Carnegie Mellon University has a large computer science and engineering cohort of
     students. Incoming freshmen have such variability in their math backgrounds that
     some struggle to hit the ground running in their first year as they attempt to catch up
     to their peers in the mathematics courses. This presented a challenge that learning
     engineering techniques could help address.
           The Eberly Center for Teaching Excellence and Educational Innovation is a


     * Note: In this specific case the data points had margins of error showing levels of
       uncertainty about the measurement. Fitting a curve to uncertain points leads to uncertain
       predictions, but to illustrate a simple predictive model based on fitting to a curve we’ll
       assume we have error-free data points.
                          Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 2): Analytics | 193



centralized campus office that helps faculty use learning science research, collect
data, and “ . . . design and implement meaningful educational experiences.”
In addition to the services offered by the Eberly Center, CMU has packaged its
educational technologies into a toolkit that supports the spectrum from learning
design through analysis and iterative improvement. This ecosystem of tools is called
the OpenSimon Toolkit.
       Using the OpenSimon Toolkit, Marsha Lovett, Director of the Eberly
Center, worked with her learning engineering, data science, and computer science
colleagues to solve the freshman math challenge. Specifically, they designed a set
of self-paced modules targeting the prerequisite skills that incoming students lacked
so that all students started with the same baseline competency. The system was also
instrumented to provide data to faculty about the areas where new students might
still be weak.
       Marsha and her team built three modules and packaged them into a course
called Discrete Math Primer. They used the Open Learning Initiative platform
within OpenSimon; it’s a kind of online textbook-replacement courseware. Each
of the Discrete Math Primer modules targeted a primary math skill: logic, sets, or
functions. Each module included practice and assessment questions that provided
data about students’ number of attempts, correctness, and need for hints. Pre- and
post-tests measured learning gains in a summative fashion.
       One way to model learning is using a learning curve that shows the rate
of a person’s (or group of people’s) progress at learning a new skill over time.
Learning curves show what we can’t necessarily see with just the raw data. Using



        100

             90
Quiz Score




             80
                                                              FIGURE 6.7.
                                                              2016 post-test data
             70                                               from CMU’s Discrete
                                                              Math Primer
             60

             50

                  Logic          Sets         Functions
194 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     LearnSphere 10 as a data repository and analysis infrastructure, and DataShop 11
     analysis tools for generating learning curves, CMU could chart the learning or lack
     thereof taking place. These analyses also provided key information about which
     skills students needed more practice with as well as where there were holes in the
     analytics being collected.
            The course was first offered to students in the summer of 2016. In the first
     delivery of the course, they found that students were generally improving, according
     to post-test data at the conclusion of the modules—except in functions. (See Fig-
     ure 6.7.) However, using learning curve analysis on each individual skill, the data
     appeared to be more nuanced than this. The learning curves in Figure 6.7 provide
     a visualization of the data for two of the skills: logic and functions. The number of
     opportunities to practice a skill is shown along the x-axis, and the error rate is on the
     y-axis. With each attempt at practicing the same skill, the number of errors a student
     will generate should decrease.
            Ideally, learning curves should generally look like the dotted line shown in the
     functions module graph on the right in Figure 6.8. It starts high and goes down in a
     smooth line. For the logic module learning curve (on the left of Figure 6.8), learning
     doesn’t seem to be occurring—students aren’t improving with this skill over time.
     And although the learning curve for the functions module looks better, it has some
     strange anomalies where the error rate goes back up, such as right before the fifth
     and fifteenth attempts. These anomalies show where learning isn’t taking place as
     expected, but they don’t tell us the causes of the anomalies. Finding the cause of the
     anomalies requires more investigation. It could be that learning can be improved
     by providing more practice opportunities for a given skill, more scaffolding in the
     course in the form of more or better instruction, or by breaking down the skills fur-
     ther to provide more practice opportunities in finer-grained skills. These are just a
     few of the next steps that were taken on this Discrete Math Primer.
            With a few new refinements for the course identified, Marsha and her team
     went to work. They added more practice and feedback on targeted skills and
     improved the summative assessments. The improved course was delivered, and
     more data were collected and analyzed in the summer of 2017. This analysis and
     subsequent improvement provided even better results.
            CMU departments were pleased. The changes to the course, targeting individ-
     ual skills for improvement interventions, led to a significant increase in the students’
     understanding of functions.
            But there was still room for iterative improvement. Data from subsequent
     courses showed that students were still struggling with transfer of the concepts to
                                          Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 2): Analytics | 195



                                                  STUDENT ERROR RATE
                       E
LEARNING CURV                                      (SOLID)
     (DOTTED)
    Error Rate




                                                              Error Rate
                                   Time                                          Time

                   Logic Module                                            Functions Module
                     PROBLEMATIC                                                GOOD

   FIGURE 6.8. 2016 learning curve analyses from CMU’s Discrete Math Primer. The
   right side shows that learning is taking place (as error rates fall over time), while
   the left side indicates an issue with the learning or assessment experience.




                         100

                              90
                 Quiz Score




                              80

                              70

                              60

                              50

                                          Logic           Sets                Functions

                                    SUMMER 2016        SUMMER 2017             SUMMER 2018



   FIGURE 6.9. 2016–2018 post-test data from CMU’s Discrete Math Primer
196 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     open-ended problems. Since open-ended questions are difficult to auto-grade in an
     online course, the next improvement step was to add cognitive tutor authoring tools
     to the course. These tools provides an interface for developing complex problems
     with multiple steps. By integrating them into the course, Marsha and her team were
     instrumenting it for finer-grained data collection during each step in a problem. For
     the students, cognitive tutors provide practice in individual skills, with feedback
     given with each step in a problem. The results of this iteratively improved course
     resulted in even more significant learning gains for the students, evidenced by the
     following year’s post-test data. See Figure 6.9 for a comparison of the 2016, 2017,
     and 2018 course outcomes.
           CMU’s Discrete Math Primer is still in use today and is used by more faculty
     each semester. The success of this iterative problem solving also has resulted in
     the math faculty requesting more modules for their majors. Learning engineering
     processes have given the students a way to come up to speed with their peers, and
     the faculty a tool for supporting struggling students.
• Analytics, the systematic computational analysis of data, is central to the
  investigation phase of the learning engineering process.

• Data analysis is needed because human intuition is often wrong.

• Findings from the learning sciences can inform theories that can be
  tested by analyzing data from experiments.

• Research within learning engineering focuses on identifying highly
  contextualized findings about learning within specific products or
  conditions for specific learner populations.

• Learning engineering—and data analysis for learning engineering—is
  a team sport often requiring psychometricians, learning designers,
  content and assessment developers, implementation consultants, UI / UX
  designers, data scientists, software engineers, and product managers.

• Big data are extremely large data sets that may be analyzed
  computationally to reveal patterns, trends, and associations, especially
  relating to human behavior and interactions.

• Quantitative data doesn’t always tell the whole story.

• Learning is contextually situated and so are the results of any
  experimental data.

• Data can be used to question existing practices and assumptions.

• In learning engineering, data are sometimes used to model things
  about the learner, to predict a learner’s state or behavior under given
  conditions, and to predict how well a given learning activity will bring
  about a given learning outcome.

• Learning curve analysis shows a learner’s progress at learning a new skill
  over time. One form of learning curve analysis measures error rates on
  assessment problems; as a person masters a skill their errors should go
  down.




             LEARNING ENGINEERING USES DATA (PART 2): ANALYTICS

                    KEY POINTS
198 | Learning Engineering Toolkit



     Endnotes
     1 Brown, Jessie and Martin Kurzweil. “Engineering Learning at Kaplan University.” Ithaka S+R.
       Last modified October 6, 2016. https://doi.org/10.18665/sr.284711
     2 Saxberg, Bror. “Executing the Change to Learning Engineering at Scale.” In Chris Dede, John
       Richards, Bror Saxberg (eds.). Learning Engineering for Online Education: Theoretical Contexts
       and Design-Based Examples, 1st ed. New York: Routledge, 2018, 166–193.
       https://doi.org/10.4324/9781351186193
     3 Saxberg, “Executing the Change to Learning Engineering at Scale.”
     4 Saxberg, “Executing the Change to Learning Engineering at Scale.”
     5 Rudman, Larry, John Sweller, and David Niemi. “Using Cognitive Load Theory to Improve
       Logical Reasoning for the LSAT.” In Proceedings of 2013 Annual Meeting of the American
       Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA, April 29, 2013
     6 Jones, Steve. “The Friendly Orange Glow: The Untold Story of the PLATO System and
       the Dawn of Cyberculture.” New Media & Society 20, no. 11 (2018): 405–408. https://doi.
       org/10.1177/1461444818784306
     7 Baker, Ryan S. “Designing intelligent tutors that adapt to when students game the system.” PhD
       diss. Carnegie Mellon University, 2005. http://reports-archive.adm.cs.cmu.edu/anon/hcii/CMU-
       HCII-05-104.pdf
        Baker, Ryan S., Albert T. Corbett, Kenneth R. Koedinger, Shelley Evenson, Ido Roll, Angela Z.
        Wagner, Meghan Naim, Jay Raspat, Daniel J. Baker, and Joseph E. Beck. “Adapting to When
        Students Game an Intelligent Tutoring System.” In Proceedings of the International Conference
        on Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Jhongli, Taiwan, June 26–30, 2006. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
        https://u1lib.org/book/774357/133d6d
     8 Data Management. “Data Standards.” US Geological Survey. Last modified May 3, 2021.
       www.usgs.gov/products/data-and-tools/data-management/data-standards
     9 Lane, H. Chad. “Cognitive Models of Learning.” In Encyclopedia of the Sciences of Learning,
       edited by Norbert M. Seel. Boston: Springer, 2012.
       https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-1428-6_241
     10 “A Community Data Infrastructure to Support Learning Improvement Online.” LearnSphere.
        Carnegie Mellon University, 2018. http://learnsphere.org
     11 “DataShop @CMU: A Data Analysis Service for the Learning Science Community.” Carnegie
        Mellon University. Last modified October 31, 2021. https://pslcdatashop.web.cmu.edu
     12 Closing quotation sourced from Hey, Tony, Stewart Tansley, and Kristin Tolle, eds. “Jim Gray on
        eScience: A Transformed Scientific Method.” In The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientific
        Discovery. Redmond, VA: Microsoft Research, 2009, xix.
         Learning Engineering Uses Data (Part 2): Analytics | 199




    People now do not actually look
 through telescopes. Instead, they are
“looking” through large-scale, complex
   instruments that relay data to data
 centers, and only then do they look at
  the information on their computers.

                           – Jim Gray 12
